                                                                                                                 1

                                              The Canons of Dort



              RATIFIED IN THE NATIONAL SYNOD OF THE REFORMED CHURCH

                                Held at Dordrecht in the years 1618 and 1619



The Decision of the Synod of Dort on the Five Main Points of Doctrine in Dispute in the Netherlands is
popularly known as the Canons of Dort (or the Five Articles Against the Remonstrants). It consists of
statements of doctrine adopted by the great Synod of Dort which met in the city of Dordrecht in 1618-1619.
Although this was a national Synod of the Reformed Churches of the Netherlands, it had an international
character, since it was composed not only of sixty-two Dutch delegates, but also of twenty-seven foreign
delegates representing eight countries.



The Synod of Dort was held in order to settle a serious controversy in the Dutch churches initiated by the rise
of Arminianism. Jacob Arminius (1560-1609), a theological professor at Leiden University, departed from the
Reformed faith on a number of important points. After Arminius's death, forty-three of his ministerial
followers drafted and presented their heretical views to the States General of the Netherlands on five of these
points in the Remonstrance of 1610. In this document and even more explicitly in later writings, the
Arminians, who came to be called Remonstrants, taught (1) election based on foreseen faith, (2) the
universal merits of Christ, (3) the free will of man due to only partial depravity, (4) the resistibility of grace,
and (5) the possibility of a lapse from grace. They desired the Reformed church's doctrinal standards to be
revised and their own minority views to be protected by the government. The Arminian-Calvinism conflict
became so severe that it led the Netherlands to the brink of civil war. Finally in 1617 the States General voted
four to three to call a national Synod to address Arminianism.



The Synod held 154 formal sessions over a period of seven months (November 1618 to May 1619). Thirteen
Remonstrant theologians, led by Simon Episcopius, used various tactics to delay the work of Synod and to
divide the delegates tactics which proved to be unsuccessful. Under the leadership of Johannes Bogerman,
the Remonstrants were dismissed. The Synod then developed the Canons which thoroughly rejected the
Remonstrance of 1610 and scripturally set forth the Reformed doctrine on these debated points, now popularly
called the five points of Calvinism : unconditional election, limited atonement, total depravity, irresistible
grace, and the perseverance of saints. Though these points do not embrace the full scope of Calvinism and are
better regarded as Calvinism's five answers to the five errors of Arminianism, they certainly lie at the heart of
the Reformed faith, particularly Reformed soteriology, for they flow out of the principle of absolute divine
sovereignty. They may be summarized as follows: (1) Unconditional election and faith are sovereign gifts of
God. (2) While the death of Christ is abundantly sufficient to expiate the sins of the whole world, its saving
efficacy is limited to the elect. (3,4) All are so totally depraved and corrupted by sin that they cannot effect
any part of their salvation; in sovereign grace God irresistibly calls and regenerates the elect to newness of
life. (5) Those thus saved God graciously preserves so that they persevere until the end, even though they may
be troubled by many infirmities as they seek to make their calling and election sure. Simply stated, we may
say that the subject matter of the Canons is: sovereign grace conceived, sovereign grace merited, sovereign
grace needed and applied, and sovereign grace preserved.



Although in form the Canons have only four sections, we speak properly of five points or heads of doctrine


                                                                                                                 1
2
because the Canons were structured to correspond to the five articles of the 1610 Remonstrance. The third and
fourth sections were purposely combined into one since the Dortian divines considered them inseparable, and
hence are designated as Head of Doctrine 3/4.



The Canons have a special character because of their original purpose as a judicial decision on the doctrinal
points in dispute during the Arminian controversy. The original preface called them a judgment, in which
both the true view, agreeing with God's Word, concerning the aforesaid five points of doctrine is explained,
and the false view, disagreeing with God's Word, is rejected. The Canons also have a limited character in
that they do not cover the whole range of doctrine, but focus on the five points of doctrine in dispute. Each of
the main heads consists of a positive and a negative part, the former being an exposition of the Reformed
doctrine on the subject, the latter a repudiation of corresponding Arminian errors (see shaded parts below). In
all, the Canons contain fifty-nine articles of exposition and thirty-four repudiations of error.



The Canons form a remarkably scriptural and balanced document on the specific doctrines expounded. They
are unique in being the sole Form of Unity composed by an ecclesiastical assembly and in representing a
consensus of all the Reformed churches of their day. Both Dutch and foreign delegates without exception
affixed their signatures to the Canons, whether of supralapsarian or infralapsarian persuasion. A service of
thanksgiving was held upon the Canons' completion to acknowledge the Lord for preserving the doctrine of
sovereign grace among the Reformed churches.


Next




2
                                                                                                                    1

FIRST HEAD OF DOCTRINE



Of Divine Predestination



Article 1

As all men have sinned in Adam, lie under the curse, and are deserving of eternal death, God would have done
no injustice by leaving them all to perish, and delivering them over to condemnation on account of sin,
according to the words of the apostle, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become
guilty before God (Rom. 3:19). And verse 23: For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God.
And Romans 6:23: For the wages of sin is death.



Article 2

But in this the love of God was manifested, that He sent His only begotten Son into the world, that whosoever
believeth on Him should not perish, but have everlasting life. In this was manifested the love of God toward
us, because that God sent His only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through Him (1 John 4:9).
 For God so loved the world, that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should
not perish, but have everlasting life (John 3:16).



Article 3

And that men may be brought to believe, God mercifully sends the messengers of these most joyful tidings to
whom He will and at what time He pleaseth; by whose ministry men are called to repentance and faith in
Christ crucified. How then shall they call on Him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they
believe in Him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher? And how shall they
preach, except they be sent? (Rom. 10:14-15).



Article 4

The wrath of God abideth upon those who believe not this gospel. But such as receive it, and embrace Jesus
the Savior by a true and living faith, are by Him delivered from the wrath of God and from destruction, and
have the gift of eternal life conferred upon them.



Article 5

The cause or guilt of this unbelief, as well as of all other sins, is no wise in God, but in man himself; whereas
faith in Jesus Christ and salvation through Him is the free gift of God, as it is written: For by grace are ye
saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God (Eph. 2:8). For unto you it is given in
the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on Him, etc. (Phil. 1:29).




                                                                                                                    1
2
Article 6

That some receive the gift of faith from God and others do not receive it proceeds from God's eternal decree,
for known unto God are all His works from the beginning of the world (Acts 15:18). Who worketh all
things after the counsel of His own will (Eph. 1:11). According to which decree, He graciously softens the
hearts of the elect, however obstinate, and inclines them to believe, while He leaves the non-elect in His just
judgment to their own wickedness and obduracy. And herein is especially displayed the profound, the
merciful, and at the same time the righteous discrimination between men, equally involved in ruin; or that
decree of election and reprobation revealed in the Word of God, which though men of perverse, impure and
unstable minds wrest to their own destruction, yet to holy and pious souls affords unspeakable consolation.



Article 7

Election is the unchangeable purpose of God, whereby, before the foundation of the world, He hath out of
mere grace, according to the sovereign good pleasure of His own will, chosen, from the whole human race,
which had fallen through their own fault from their primitive state of rectitude into sin and destruction, a
certain number of persons to redemption in Christ, whom He from eternity appointed the Mediator and Head
of the elect, and the foundation of salvation.



This elect number, though by nature neither better nor more deserving than others, but with them involved in
one common misery, God hath decreed to give to Christ, to be saved by Him, and effectually to call and draw
them to His communion by His Word and Spirit, to bestow upon them true faith, justification and
sanctification; and having powerfully preserved them in the fellowship of His Son, finally, to glorify them for
the demonstration of His mercy and for the praise of His glorious grace, as it is written: According as He
hath chosen us in Him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before
Him in love: having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to Himself, according to
the good pleasure of His will, to the praise of the glory of His grace, wherein He hath made us accepted in the
beloved (Eph. 1:4-6). And elsewhere: Whom He did predestinate, them He also called: and whom He
called, them He also justified: and whom He justified them He also glorified (Rom. 8:30).



Article 8

There are not various decrees of election, but one and the same decree respecting all those who shall be saved,
both under the Old and New Testament; since the Scripture declares the good pleasure, purpose and counsel
of the divine will to be one, according to which He hath chosen us from eternity, both to grace and glory, to
salvation and the way of salvation, which He hath ordained that we should walk therein.



Article 9

This election was not founded upon foreseen faith, and the obedience of faith, holiness, or any other good
quality or disposition in man, as the prerequisite, cause or condition on which it depended; but men are chosen
to faith and to the obedience of faith, holi−ness, etc.; therefore election is the fountain of every saving good,
from which proceeds faith, holiness, and the other gifts of salvation, and finally eternal life itself, as its fruits
and effects, according to that of the apostle: He hath chosen us [not because we were but] that we should be
holy, and without blame, before Him in love (Eph. 1:4).



2
                                                                                                                    3



Article 10

The good pleasure of God is the sole cause of this gracious election, which doth not consist herein, that out of
all possible qualities and actions of men God has chosen some as a condition of salvation; but that He was
pleased out of the common mass of sinners to adopt some certain persons as a peculiar people to Himself, as it
is written, For the children being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil, etc., it was said
(namely to Rebecca): The elder shall serve the younger. As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I
hated (Rom. 9:11-13). And as many as were ordained to eternal life believed (Acts 13:48).



Article 11

And as God Himself is most wise, unchangeable, omniscient and omnipotent, so the election made by Him
can neither be interrupted nor changed, recalled or annulled; neither can the elect be cast away, nor their
number diminished.



Article 12

The elect in due time, though in various degrees and in different measures, attain the assurance of this their
eternal and unchangeable election, not by inquisitively prying into the secret and deep things of God, but by
observing in themselves, with a spiritual joy and holy pleasure, the infallible fruits of election pointed out in
the Word of God such as a true faith in Christ, filial fear, a godly sorrow for sin, a hungering and thirsting
after righteousness, etc.



Article 13

The sense and certainty of this election afford to the children of God additional matter for daily humiliation
before Him, for adoring the depth of His mercies, for cleansing themselves, and rendering grateful returns of
ardent love to Him, who first manifested so great love towards them. The consideration of this doctrine of
election is so far from encouraging remissness in the observance of the divine commands or from sinking men
in carnal security, that these, in the just judgment of God, are the usual effects of rash presumption or of idle
and wanton trifling with the grace of election in those who refuse to walk in the ways of the elect.



Article 14

As the doctrine of divine election by the most wise counsel of God was declared by the prophets, by Christ
Himself, and by the apostles, and is clearly revealed in the Scriptures, both of the Old and New Testament, so
it is still to be published in due time and place in the Church of God, for which it was peculiarly designed,
provided it be done with reverence, in the spirit of discretion and piety, for the glory of God's most holy
Name, and for enlivening and comforting His people, without vainly attempting to investigate the secret ways
of the Most High. For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God (Acts 20:27); O the
depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are His judgments, and His
ways past finding out! For who hath known the mind of the Lord? or who hath been His counsellor? (Rom.
11:33-34); For I say, through the grace given unto me, to every man that is among you, not to think of
himself more highly than he ought to think; but to think soberly, according as God hath dealt to every man the


                                                                                                                    3
4
measure of faith (Rom. 12:3); Wherein God, willing more abundantly to shew unto the heirs of promise the
immutability of His counsel, confirmed it by an oath: that by two immutable things, in which it was
impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the
hope set before us (Heb. 6:17-18).



Article 15

What peculiarly tends to illustrate and recommend to us the eternal and unmerited grace of election, is the
express testimony of sacred Scripture that not all, but some only are elected, while others are passed by in the
eternal decree; whom God, out of His sovereign, most just, irreprehensible and unchangeable good pleasure,
hath decreed to leave in the common misery into which they have wilfully plunged themselves, and not to
bestow upon them saving faith and the grace of conversion; but permitting them in His just judgment to
follow their own ways, at last for the declaration of His justice, to condemn and perish them forever, not only
on account of their unbelief, but also for all their other sins. And this is the decree of reprobation which by no
means makes God the author of sin (the very thought of which is blasphemy), but declares Him to be an
awful, irreprehensible, and righteous Judge and avenger thereof.



Article 16

Those who do not yet experience a lively faith in Christ, an assured confidence of soul, peace of conscience,
an earnest endeavor after filial obedience, and glorying in God through Christ, efficaciously wrought in them,
and do nevertheless persist in the use of the means which God hath appointed for working these graces in us,
ought not to be alarmed at the mention of reprobation, nor to rank themselves among the reprobate, but
diligently to persevere in the use of means, and with ardent desires devoutly and humbly to wait for a season
of richer grace. Much less cause have they to be terrified by the doctrine of reprobation, who, though they
seriously desire to be turned to God, to please Him only, and to be delivered from the body of death, cannot
yet reach that measure of holiness and faith to which they aspire; since a merciful God has promised that He
will not quench the smoking flax nor break the bruised reed. But this doctrine is justly terrible to those, who,
regardless of God and of the Savior Jesus Christ, have wholly given themselves up to the cares of the world
and the pleasures of the flesh, so long as they are not seriously converted to God.



Article 17

Since we are to judge of the will of God from His Word which testifies that the children of believers are holy,
not by nature, but in virtue of the covenant of grace, in which they, together with the parents, are
comprehended, godly parents have no reason to doubt of the election and salvation of their children whom it
pleaseth God to call out of this life in their infancy.



Article 18

To those who murmur at the free grace of election and just severity of reprobation, we answer with the
apostle: Nay but, O man, who art thou that repliest against God? (Rom. 9:20), and quote the language of
our Savior: Is it not lawful for Me to do what I will with Mine own? (Matt. 20:15). And therefore with holy
adoration of these mysteries, we exclaim in the words of the apostle: O the depth of the riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are His judgments, and His ways past finding out! For who
hath known the mind of the Lord? or who hath been His counsellor? Or who hath first given to Him, and it


4
                                                                                                                5

shall be recompensed unto him again? For of Him, and through Him, and to Him, are all things: to whom be
glory for ever. Amen (Rom. 11:33-36).



                                                 ___________



The true doctrine concerning election and rejection having been explained, the Synod rejects the errors of
those who teach:



Rejection 1

That the will of God to save those who would believe and would persevere in faith and in the obedience of
faith, is the whole and entire decree of election unto salvation, and that nothing else concerning this decree
has been revealed in God's Word. For these deceive the simple and plainly contradict the Scriptures which
declare that God will not only save those who will believe, but that He has also from eternity chosen certain
particular persons to whom above others He in time will grant both faith in Christ and perseverance, as it is
written: I have manifested Thy Name unto the men which Thou gavest Me out of the world (John 17:6).
  And as many as were ordained to eternal life believed (Acts 13:48). And: According as He hath chosen us
in Him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before Him in love
(Eph. 1:4).



Rejection 2

That there are various kinds of election of God unto eternal life: the one general and indefinite, the other
particular and definite; and that the latter in turn is either incom−plete, revocable, nondecisive and
conditional, or complete, irrevocable, decisive and absolute. Likewise: that there is one election unto faith
and another unto salvation, so that election can be unto justifying faith without being a decisive election unto
salva−tion. For this is a fancy of men's minds, invented regardless of the Scriptures, whereby the doctrine of
election is corrupted, and this golden chain of our salvation is broken: Moreover whom He did predestinate,
them He also called: and whom He called, them He also justified: and whom He justified, them He also
glorified (Rom. 8:30).



Rejection 3

That the good pleasure and purpose of God, of which Scripture makes mention in the doctrine of election,
does not consist in this, that God chose certain persons rather than others, but in this, that He chose out of all
possible conditions (among which are also the works of the law), or out of the whole order of things, the act of
faith which from its very nature is undeserving, as well as its incomplete obedience, as a condition of
salvation, and that He would graciously consider this in itself as a complete obedience and count it worthy of
the reward of eternal life. For by this injurious error the pleasure of God and the merits of Christ are made of
none effect, and men are drawn away by useless questions from the truth of gracious justification and from the
simplicity of Scripture, and this declaration of the apostle is charged as untrue: Who hath saved us, and
called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to His own purpose and grace, which
was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began (2 Tim. 1:9).



                                                                                                                5
6



Rejection 4

That in the election unto faith this condition is beforehand demanded, namely, that man should use the light of
nature aright, be pious, humble, meek, and fit for eternal life, as if on these things election were in any way
dependent. For this savors of the teaching of Pelagius, and is opposed to the doctrine of the apostle, when he
writes: Among whom also we all had our conversation in times past in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the
desires of the flesh and of the mind; and were by nature the children of wrath, even as others. But God, who is
rich in mercy, for His great love wherewith He loved us, even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us
together with Christ, (by grace ye are saved;) and hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus: that in the ages to come He might show the exceeding riches of His grace in
His kindness toward us through Christ Jesus. For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of
yourselves: it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should boast (Eph. 2:3-9).



Rejection 5

That the incomplete and non-decisive election of particular persons to salvation occurred because of a
foreseen faith, conversion, holiness, godliness, which either began or continued for some time; but that the
complete and decisive election occurred because of foreseen perseverance unto the end in faith, conversion,
holiness and godliness; and that this is the gracious and evangelical worthiness for the sake of which he who
is chosen is more worthy than he who is not chosen; and that therefore faith, the obedience of faith, holiness,
godliness and perseverance are not fruits of the unchangeable election unto glory, but are conditions, which,
being required beforehand, were foreseen as being met by those who will be fully elected, and are causes
without which the unchangeable election to glory does not occur. This is repugnant to the entire Scripture
which constantly inculcates this and similar declarations: Election is not out of works, but of Him that calleth.
  That the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of works, but of Him that calleth (Rom.
9:11). And as many as were ordained to eternal life believed (Acts 13:48). He hath chosen us in Him
before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy (Eph. 1:4). Ye have not chosen Me, but I have
chosen you (John 15:16). But if it be of works, then is it no more grace (Rom. 11:6). Herein is love, not
that we loved God, but that He loved us, and sent His Son (1 John 4:10).



Rejection 6

That not every election unto salvation is unchangeable, but that some of the elect, any decree of God
notwithstanding, can yet perish and do indeed perish. By which gross error they make God to be changeable,
and destroy the comfort which the godly obtain out of the firmness of their election, and contradict the Holy
Scripture which teaches that the elect cannot be led astray: Insomuch that, if it were possible, they shall
deceive the very elect (Matt. 24:24); that Christ does not lose those whom the Father gave Him: And this is
the Father's will which hath sent Me, that of all which He hath given Me I should lose nothing (John 6:39);
and that God hath also glorified those whom He foreordained, called and justified: Moreover whom He did
predestinate, them He also called: and whom He called, them He also justified: and whom He justified, them
He also glorified (Rom. 8:30).



Rejection 7

That there is in this life no fruit and no consciousness of the unchangeable election to glory, nor any certainty,
except that which depends on a changeable and uncertain condition. For not only is it absurd to speak of an


6
                                                                                                              7
uncertain certainty, but also contrary to the experience of the saints, who by virtue of the consciousness of
their election rejoice with the apostle and praise this favor of God, Ephesians 1; ; who according to Christ's
admonition rejoice with His disciples that their names are written in heaven, but rather rejoice, because your
names are written in heaven (Luke 10:20); who also place the consciousness of their election over against
the fiery darts of the devil, asking: Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? (Rom. 8:33).



Rejection 8

That God, simply by virtue of His righteous will, did not decide either to leave anyone in the fall of Adam and
in the common state of sin and condemnation, or to pass anyone by in the communication of grace which is
necessary for faith and conversion. For this is firmly decreed: Therefore hath He mercy on whom He will
have mercy, and whom He will He hardeneth (Rom. 9:18). And also this: It is given unto you to know the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given (Matt. 13:11). Likewise: I thank Thee, O
Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast
revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father: for so it seemed good in Thy sight (Matt. 11:25-26).



Rejection 9

That the reason why God sends the gospel to one people rather than to another is not merely and solely the
good pleasure of God, but rather the fact that one people is better and worthier than another to whom the
gospel is not communicated. For this Moses denies, addressing the people of Israel as follows: Behold, the
heaven and the heaven of heavens is the LORD'S thy God, the earth also, with all that therein is. Only the
LORD had a delight in thy fathers to love them, and He chose their seed after them, even you above all
people, as it is this day (Deut. 10:14-15). And Christ said: Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee,
Bethsaida! for if the mighty works, which were done in you, had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would
have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes (Matt. 11:21).


Previous | Next




                                                                                                              7
8




8
                                                                                                                  1

SECOND HEAD OF DOCTRINE



Of the Death of Christ and the Redemption of Men Thereby



Article 1

God is not only supremely merciful, but also supremely just. And His justice requires (as He hath revealed
Himself in His Word), that our sins committed against His infinite majesty should be punished, not only with
temporal, but with eternal punishment, both in body and soul; which we cannot escape unless satisfaction be
made to the justice of God.



Article 2

Since therefore we are unable to make that satisfaction in our own persons or to deliver ourselves from the
wrath of God, He hath been pleased in His infinite mercy to give His only begotten Son, for our surety, who
was made sin, and became a curse for us and in our stead, that He might make satisfaction to divine justice on
our behalf.



Article 3

The death of the Son of God is the only and most perfect sacrifice and satisfaction for sin, and is of infinite
worth and value, abundantly sufficient to expiate the sins of the whole world.



Article 4

This death derives its infinite value and dignity from these considerations because the person who submitted
to it was not only really man and perfectly holy, but also the only begotten Son of God, of the same eternal
and infinite essence with the Father and the Holy Spirit, which qualifications were necessary to constitute Him
a Savior for us; and because it was attended with a sense of the wrath and curse of God due to us for sin.



Article 5

Moreover, the promise of the gospel is, that whosoever believeth in Christ crucified, shall not perish, but have
everlasting life. This promise, together with the command to repent and believe, ought to be declared and
published to all nations, and to all persons promiscuously and without distinction, to whom God out of His
good pleasure sends the gospel.



Article 6

And whereas many who are called by the gospel do not repent nor believe in Christ, but perish in unbelief,


                                                                                                                  1
2

this is not owing to any defect or insufficiency in the sacrifice offered by Christ upon the cross, but is wholly
to be imputed to themselves.



Article 7

But as many as truly believe, and are delivered and saved from sin and destruction through the death of Christ,
are indebted for this benefit solely to the grace of God, given them in Christ from everlasting, and not to any
merit of their own.



Article 8

For this was the sovereign counsel, and most gracious will and purpose of God the Father, that the quickening
and saving efficacy of the most precious death of His Son should extend to all the elect, for bestowing upon
them alone the gift of justifying faith, thereby to bring them infallibly to salvation: that is, it was the will of
God, that Christ by the blood of the cross, whereby He confirmed the new covenant, should effectually
redeem out of every people, tribe, nation, and language, all those, and those only, who were from eternity
chosen to salvation and given to Him by the Father; that He should confer upon them faith, which together
with all the other saving gifts of the Holy Spirit, He purchased for them by His death; should purge them from
all sin, both original and actual, whether committed before or after believing; and having faithfully preserved
them even to the end, should at last bring them free from every spot and blemish to the enjoyment of glory in
His own presence forever.



Article 9

This purpose proceeding from everlasting love towards the elect has from the beginning of the world to this
day been powerfully accomplished, and will henceforward still continue to be accomplished, notwithstanding
all the ineffectual opposition of the gates of hell, so that the elect in due time may be gathered together into
one, and that there never may be wanting a church composed of believers, the foundation of which is laid in
the blood of Christ, which may steadfastly love and faithfully serve Him as their Savior, who as a bridegroom
for his bride, laid down His life for them upon the cross, and which may celebrate His praises here and
through all eternity.



___________



The true doctrine (concerning redemption) having been explained, the Synod rejects the errors of those who
teach:



Rejection 1

That God the Father has ordained His Son to the death of the cross without a certain and definite decree to
save any, so that the necessity, profitableness and worth of what Christ merited by His death might have
existed, and might remain in all its parts complete, perfect and intact, even if the merited redemption had


2
                                                                                                                 3
never in fact been applied to any person. For this doctrine tends to the despising of the wisdom of the Father
and of the merits of Jesus Christ, and is contrary to Scripture. For thus saith our Savior: I lay down My life
for the sheep, and I know them (John 10:15, 27). And the prophet Isaiah saith concerning the Savior: When
thou shalt make His soul an offering for sin, He shall see His seed, He shall prolong his days, and the pleasure
of the LORD shall prosper in his hand (Is. 53:10). Finally, this contradicts the article of faith according to
which we believe the catholic Christian church.



Rejection 2

That it was not the purpose of the death of Christ that He should confirm the new covenant of grace through
His blood, but only that He should acquire for the Father the mere right to establish with man such a
covenant as He might please, whether of grace or of works. For this is repugnant to Scripture which teaches
that Christ has become the Surety and Mediator of a better, that is, the new covenant, and that a testament is of
force where death has occurred. By so much was Jesus made a surety of a better testament (Heb. 7:22);
  And for this cause He is the Mediator of the new testament, that by means of death, for the redemption of the
transgressions that were under the first testament, they which are called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance ; For a testament is of force after men are dead: otherwise it is of no strength at all while the
testator liveth (Heb. 9:15, 17).



Rejection 3

That Christ by His satisfaction merited neither salvation itself for anyone, nor faith, whereby this satisfaction
of Christ unto salvation is effectually appropriated; but that He merited for the Father only the authority or
the perfect will to deal again with man, and to prescribe new conditions as He might desire, obedience to
which, however, depended on the free will of man, so that it therefore might have come to pass that either
none or all should fulfill these conditions. For these adjudge too contemptuously of the death of Christ, do in
no wise acknowledge the most important fruit or benefit thereby gained, and bring again out of hell the
Pelagian error.



Rejection 4

That the new covenant of grace, which God the Father, through the mediation of the death of Christ, made
with man, does not herein consist that we by faith, inasmuch as it accepts the merits of Christ, are justified
before God and saved, but in the fact that God having revoked the demand of perfect obedience of faith,
regards faith itself and the obedience of faith, although imperfect, as the perfect obedience of the law, and
does esteem it worthy of the reward of eternal life through grace. For these contradict the Scriptures: Being
justified freely by His grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus: whom God hath set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in His blood (Rom. 3:24-25). And these proclaim, as did the wicked Socinus, a
new and strange justification of man before God against the consensus of the whole church.



Rejection 5

That all men have been accepted unto the state of reconciliation and unto the grace of the covenant, so that no
one is worthy of condemnation on account of original sin, and that no one shall be condemned because of it,
but that all are free from the guilt of original sin. For this opinion is repugnant to Scripture which teaches that
we are by nature children of wrath (Eph. 2:3).


                                                                                                                 3
4



Rejection 6

The use of the difference between meriting and appropriating, to the end that they may instill into the minds of
the imprudent and inexperienced this teaching that God, as far as He is concerned, has been minded of
applying to all equally the benefits gained by the death of Christ; but that, while some obtain the pardon of sin
and eternal life, and others do not, this difference depends on their own free will, which joins itself to the
grace that is offered without exception, and that it is not dependent on the special gift of mercy, which
powerfully works in them, that they rather than others should appropriate unto themselves this grace. For
these, while they feign that they present this distinction in a sound sense, seek to instill into the people the
destructive poison of the Pelagian errors.



Rejection 7

That Christ neither could die, needed to die, nor did die for those whom God loved in the highest degree and
elected to eternal life, and did not die for these, since these do not need the death of Christ. For they
contradict the apostle, who declares: the Son of God, who loved me, and gave Himself for me (Gal. 2:20).
Likewise: Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he that
condemneth? It is Christ that died (Rom. 8:33-34), namely, for them; and the Savior who says: I lay down
My life for the sheep (John 10:15). And: This is My commandment, That ye love one another, as I have
loved you. Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends (John 15:12-13).


Previous | Next




4
                                                                                                                  1

THIRD AND FOURTH HEADS OF DOCTRINE



Of the Corruption of Man, His Conversion to God, and the Manner Thereof



Article 1

Man was originally formed after the image of God. His understanding was adorned with a true and saving
knowledge of his Creator and of spiritual things; his heart and will were upright; all his affections pure; and
the whole man was holy; but revolting from God by the instigation of the devil, and abusing the freedom of
his own will, he forfeited these excellent gifts; and on the contrary entailed on himself blindness of mind,
horrible darkness, vanity and perverseness of judgment, became wicked, rebellious, and obdurate in heart and
will, and impure in his affections.



Article 2

Man after the fall begat children in his own likeness. A corrupt stock produced a corrupt offspring. Hence all
the posterity of Adam, Christ only excepted, have derived corruption from their original parent, not by
imitation, as the Pelagians of old asserted, but by the propagation of a vicious nature.



Article 3

Therefore all men are conceived in sin, and by nature children of wrath, incapable of saving good, prone to
evil, dead in sin, and in bondage thereto, and without the regenerating grace of the Holy Spirit, they are
neither able nor willing to return to God, to reform the depravity of their nature, or to dispose themselves to
reformation.



Article 4

There remain, however, in man since the fall, the glimmerings of natural light, whereby he retains some
knowledge of God, of natural things, and of the differences between good and evil, and discovers some regard
for virtue, good order in society, and for maintaining an orderly external deportment. But so far is this light of
nature from being sufficient to bring him to a saving knowledge of God and to true conversion, that he is
incapable of using it aright even in things natural and civil. Nay, further, this light, such as it is, man in
various ways renders wholly polluted and holds it in unrighteousness, by doing which he becomes
inexcusable before God.



Article 5

In the same light are we to consider the law of the decalogue, delivered by God to His peculiar people the
Jews by the hands of Moses. For though it discovers the greatness of sin, and more and more convinces man
thereof, yet as it neither points out a remedy nor imparts strength to extricate him from misery, and thus being
weak through the flesh leaves the transgressor under the curse, man cannot by this law obtain saving grace.


                                                                                                                  1
2



Article 6

What therefore neither the light of nature, nor the law could do, that God performs by the operation of the
Holy Spirit through the Word or ministry of reconciliation, which is the glad tidings concerning the Messiah,
by means whereof it hath pleased God to save such as believe, as well under the Old, as under the New
Testament.



Article 7

This mystery of His will God discovered to but a small number under the Old Testament; under the New (the
distinction between various peoples having been removed), He reveals Himself to many without any
distinction of people. The cause of this dispensation is not to be ascribed to the superior worth of one nation
above another, nor to their making a better use of the light of nature, but results wholly from the sovereign
good pleasure and unmerited love of God. Hence they, to whom so great and so gracious a blessing is
communicated above their desert, or rather notwithstanding their demerits, are bound to acknowledge it with
humble and grateful hearts, and with the apostle to adore, not curiously to pry into the severity and justice of
God's judgments displayed to others, to whom this grace is not given.



Article 8

As many as are called by the gospel are unfeignedly called. For God hath most earnestly and truly declared in
His Word what will be acceptable to Him; namely, that all who are called, should comply with the invitation.
He, moreover, seriously promises eternal life and rest to as many as shall come to Him and believe on Him.



Article 9

It is not the fault of the gospel nor of Christ, offered therein, nor of God, who calls men by the gospel and
confers upon them various gifts, that those who are called by the ministry of the Word refuse to come and be
converted. The fault lies in themselves, some of whom when called, regardless of their danger, reject the word
of life; others, though they receive it, suffer it not to make a lasting impression on their heart; therefore, their
joy, arising only from a temporary faith, soon vanishes and they fall away; while others choke the seed of the
Word by perplexing cares and the pleasures of this world, and produce no fruit. This our Savior teaches in the
parable of the sower (Matt. 13).



Article 10

But that others who are called by the gospel obey the call and are converted is not to be ascribed to the proper
exercise of free will, whereby one distinguishes himself above others, equally furnished with grace sufficient
for faith and conversions as the proud heresy of Pelagius maintains; but it must be wholly ascribed to God,
who as He has chosen His own from eternity in Christ, so He confers upon them faith and repentance, rescues
them from the power of darkness, and translates them into the kingdom of His own Son, that they may show
forth the praises of Him who hath called them out of darkness into His marvelous light; and may glory not in
themselves, but in the Lord according to the testimony of the apostles in various places.



2
                                                                                                               3



Article 11

But when God accomplishes His good pleasure in the elect or works in them true conversion, He not only
causes the gospel to be externally preached to them and powerfully illuminates their mind by His Holy Spirit,
that they may rightly understand and discern the things of the Spirit of God; but by the efficacy of the same
regenerating Spirit, pervades the inmost recesses of the man; He opens the closed, and softens the hardened
heart, and circumcises that which was uncircumcised, infuses new qualities into the will, which though
heretofore dead, He quickens; from being evil, disobedient, and refractory, He renders it good, obedient, and
pliable; actuates and strengthens it, that like a good tree, it may bring forth the fruits of good actions.



Article 12

And this is the regeneration so highly celebrated in Scripture and denominated a new creation: a resurrection
from the dead, a making alive, which God works in us without our aid. But this is in no wise effected merely
by the external preaching of the gospel, by moral suasion, or such a mode of operation, that after God has
performed His part, it still remains in the power of man to be regenerated or not, to be converted or to
continue unconverted; but it is evidently a supernatural work, most powerful, and at the same time most
delightful, astonishing, mysterious, and ineffable; not inferior in efficacy to creation or the resurrection from
the dead, as the Scripture inspired by the author of this work declares; so that all in whose heart God works in
this marvelous manner are certainly, infallibly, and effectually regenerated, and do actually believe.
Whereupon the will thus renewed is not only actuated and influenced by God, but in consequence of this
influence, becomes itself active. Wherefore also, man is himself rightly said to believe and repent, by virtue of
that grace received.



Article 13

The manner of this operation cannot be fully comprehended by believers in this life. Notwithstanding which,
they rest satisfied with knowing and experiencing that by this grace of God they are enabled to believe with
the heart, and love their Savior.



Article 14

Faith is therefore to be considered as the gift of God, not on account of its being offered by God to man, to be
accepted or rejected at his pleasure; but because it is in reality conferred, breathed, and infused into him; or
even because God bestows the power or ability to believe, and then expects that man should by the exercise of
his own free will, consent to the terms of salvation and actually believe in Christ; but because He who works
in man both to will and to do, and indeed all things in all, produces both the will to believe and the act of
believing also.



Article 15

God is under no obligation to confer this grace upon any; for how can He be indebted to man, who had no
previous gifts to bestow, as a foundation for such recompense? Nay, who has nothing of his own but sin and
falsehood? He therefore who becomes the subject of this grace, owes eternal gratitude to God, and gives Him


                                                                                                               3
4
thanks forever. Whoever is not made partaker thereof, is either altogether regardless of these spiritual gifts and
satisfied with his own condition, or is in no apprehension of danger and vainly boasts the possession of that
which he has not. With respect to those who make an external profession of faith and live regular lives, we are
bound, after the example of the apostle, to judge and speak of them in the most favorable manner. For the
secret recesses of the heart are unknown to us. And as to others, who have not yet been called, it is our duty to
pray for them to God, who calls the things that are not, as if they were. But we are in no wise to conduct
ourselves towards them with haughtiness, as if we had made ourselves to differ.



Article 16

But as man by the fall did not cease to be a creature endowed with understanding and will, nor did sin which
pervaded the whole race of mankind deprive him of the human nature, but brought upon him depravity and
spiritual death; so also this grace of regeneration does not treat men as senseless stocks and blocks, nor takes
away their will and its properties, neither does violence thereto; but spiritually quickens, heals, corrects, and at
the same time sweetly and powerfully bends it; that where carnal rebellion and resistance formerly prevailed,
a ready and sincere spiritual obedience begins to reign, in which the true and spiritual restoration and freedom
of our will consist. Wherefore unless the admirable Author of every good work wrought in us, man could have
no hope of recovering from his fall by his own free will, by the abuse of which, in a state of innocence, he
plunged himself into ruin.



Article 17

As the almighty operation of God, whereby He prolongs and supports this our natural life, does not exclude,
but requires the use of means, by which God of His infinite mercy and goodness hath chosen to exert His
influence, so also the beforementioned supernatural operation of God, by which we are regenerated, in no
wise excludes or subverts the use of the gospel, which the most wise God has ordained to be the seed of
regeneration and food of the soul. Wherefore, as the apostles, and teachers who succeeded them, piously
instructed the people concerning this grace of God, to His glory, and the abasement of all pride, and in the
meantime, however, neglected not to keep them by the sacred precepts of the gospel in the exercise of the
Word, sacraments and discipline; so even to this day, be it far from either instructors or instructed to presume
to tempt God in the church by separating what He of His good pleasure hath most intimately joined together.
For grace is conferred by means of admonitions; and the more readily we perform our duty, the more eminent
usually is this blessing of God working in us, and the more directly is His work advanced; to whom alone all
the glory both of means, and of their saving fruit and efficacy is forever due. Amen.



___________



The true doctrine (concerning corruption and conversion) having been explained, the Synod rejects the errors
of those who teach:



Rejection 1

That it cannot properly be said that original sin in itself suffices to condemn the whole human race or to
deserve temporal and eternal punishment. For these contradict the apostle, who declares: Wherefore, as by


4
                                                                                                                   5

one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have
sinned (Rom. 5:12). And: The judgment was by one to condemnation (Rom. 5:16). And: The wages of
sin is death (Rom. 6:23).



Rejection 2

That the spiritual gifts or the good qualities and virtues, such as goodness, holiness, righteousness, could not
belong to the will of man when he was first created, and that these, therefore, could not have been separated
therefrom in the fall. For such is contrary to the description of the image of God which the apostle gives in
Ephesians 4:24, where he declares that it consists in righteousness and holiness, which undoubtedly belong to
the will.



Rejection 3

That in spiritual death the spiritual gifts are not separate from the will of man, since the will in itself has
never been corrupted, but only hindered through the darkness of the understanding and the irregularity of the
affections; and that, these hindrances having been removed, the will can then bring into operation its native
powers, that is, that the will of itself is able to will and to choose, or not to will and not to choose, all manner
of good which may be presented to it. This is an innovation and an error, and tends to elevate the powers of
the free will, contrary to the declaration of the prophet: The heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked (Jer. 17:9); and of the apostle: Among whom (sons of disobedience) also we all had our
conversation in times past in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind (Eph.
2:3).



Rejection 4

That the unregenerate man is not really nor utterly dead in sin, nor destitute of all powers unto spiritual good,
but that he can yet hunger and thirst after righteousness and life, and offer the sacrifice of a contrite and
broken spirit, which is pleasing to God. For these are contrary to the express testimony of Scripture. Who
were dead in trespasses and sins ; Even when we were dead in sins (Eph. 2:1, 5); and: every imagination
of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually (Gen. 6:5); for the imagination of man's heart is evil
from his youth (Gen. 8:21).

Moreover, to hunger and thirst after deliverance from misery, and after life, and to offer unto God the sacrifice
of a broken spirit, is peculiar to the regenerate and those that are called blessed. Create in me a clean heart, O
God; and renew a right spirit within me ; Then shalt Thou be pleased with the sacrifices of righteousness,
with burnt offering and whole burnt offering: then shall they offer bullocks upon Thine altar (Ps. 51:10, 19);
 Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled (Matt. 5:6).



Rejection 5

That the corrupt and natural man can so well use the common grace (by which they understand the light of
nature), or the gifts still left him after the fall, that he can gradually gain by their good use a greater, namely,
the evangelical or saving grace and salvation itself. And that in this way God on His part shows Himself
ready to reveal Christ unto all men, since He applies to all sufficiently and efficiently the means necessary to
conversion. For the experience of all ages and the Scriptures do both testify that this is untrue. He sheweth


                                                                                                                   5
6
His word unto Jacob, His statutes and His judgments unto Israel. He hath not dealt so with any nation: and as
for His judgments, they have not known them (Ps. 147:19, 20). Who in times past suffered all nations to
walk in their own ways (Acts 14:16). And: Now when they (Paul and his companions) had gone
throughout Phrygia and the region of Galatia, and were forbidden of the Holy Ghost to preach the word in
Asia, after they were come to Mysia, they assayed to go into Bithynia: but the Spirit suffered them not (Acts
16:6, 7).



Rejection 6

That in the true conversion of man no new qualities, powers or gifts can be infused by God into the will, and
that therefore faith through which we are first converted, and because of which we are called believers, is not
a quality or gift infused by God, but only an act of man, and that it cannot be said to be a gift, except in
respect of the power to attain to this faith. For thereby they contradict the Holy Scriptures which declare that
God infuses new qualities of faith, of obedience, and of the consciousness of His love into our hearts: I will
put My law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts (Jer. 31:33). And: I will pour water upon him
that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour My Spirit upon thy seed (Is. 44:3). And: the love
of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us (Rom. 5:5). This is also
repugnant to the continuous practice of the Church, which prays by the mouth of the prophet thus: turn Thou
me, and I shall be turned (Jer. 31:18).



Rejection 7

That the grace whereby we are converted to God is only a gentle advising, or (as others explain it), that this is
the noblest manner of working in the conversion of man, and that this manner of working, which consists in
advising, is most in harmony with man's nature; and that there is no reason why this advising grace alone
should not be sufficient to make the natural man spiritual, indeed, that God does not produce the consent of
the will except through this manner of advising; and that the power of the divine working, whereby it
surpasses the working of Satan, consists in this, that God promises eternal, while Satan promises only
temporal goods. But this is altogether Pelagian and contrary to the whole Scripture which, besides this,
teaches yet another and far more powerful and divine manner of the Holy Spirit's working in the conversion of
man, as in Ezekiel: A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you: and I will take
away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh (Ezek. 36:26).



Rejection 8

That God in the regeneration of man does not use such powers of His omnipotence as potently and infallibly
bend man's will to faith and conversion; but that all the works of grace having been accomplished, which God
employs to convert man, man may yet so resist God and the Holy Spirit when God intends man's regeneration
and wills to regenerate him, and indeed that man often does so resist that he prevents entirely his
regeneration, and that it therefore remains in man's power to be regenerated or not. For this is nothing less
than the denial of all the efficiency of God's grace in our conversion, and the subjecting of the working of the
Almighty God to the will of man, which is contrary to the apostles, who teach: who believe, according to the
working of His mighty power (Eph. 1:19). And: That our God would...fulfil all the good pleasure of His
goodness, and the work of faith with power (2 Thess. 1:11). And: According as His divine power hath
given unto us all things that pertain unto life and godliness (2 Pet. 1:3).




6
                                                                                                            7
Rejection 9 (

That grace and free will are partial causes, which together work the beginning of conversion, and that grace,
in order of working, does not precede the working of the will; that is, that God does not efficiently help the
will of man unto conversion until the will of man moves and determines to do this. For the ancient Church has
long ago condemned this doctrine of the Pelagians according to the words of the apostle: So then it is not of
him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that sheweth mercy (Rom. 9:16). Likewise: For who
maketh thee to differ from another? and what hast thou that thou didst not receive? (1 Cor. 4:7). And: For it
is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of His good pleasure (Phil. 2:13).


Previous | Next




                                                                                                            7
8




8
                                                                                                                   1

FIFTH HEAD OF DOCTRINE



Of the Perseverance of the Saints



Article 1

Whom God calls, according to His purpose, to the communion of His Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, and
regenerates by the Holy Spirit, He delivers also from the dominion and slavery of sin in this life; though not
altogether from the body of sin and from the infirmities of the flesh, so long as they continue in this world.



Article 2

Hence spring daily sins of infirmity, and hence spots adhere to the best works of the saints, which furnish
them with constant matter for humiliation before God, and flying for refuge to Christ crucified; for mortifying
the flesh more and more by the spirit of prayer, and by holy exercises of piety; and for pressing forward to the
goal of perfection, till being at length delivered from this body of death, they are brought to reign with the
Lamb of God in heaven.



Article 3

By reason of these remains of indwelling sin, and the temptations of sin and of the world, those who are
converted could not persevere in a state of grace if left to their own strength. But God is faithful, who having
conferred grace, mercifully confirms and powerfully preserves them therein, even to the end.



Article 4

Although the weakness of the flesh cannot prevail against the power of God, who confirms and preserves true
believers in a state of grace, yet converts are not always so influenced and actuated by the Spirit of God, as
not in some particular instances sinfully to deviate from the guidance of divine grace, so as to be seduced by,
and comply with the lusts of the flesh; they must, therefore, be constant in watching and prayer that they be
not led into temptation. When these are neglected, they are not only liable to be drawn into great and heinous
sins by Satan, the world and the flesh, but sometimes by the righteous permission of God actually fall into
these evils. This the lamentable fall of David, Peter, and other saints described in Holy Scripture
demonstrates.



Article 5

By such enormous sins, however, they very highly offend God, incur a deadly guilt, grieve the Holy Spirit,
interrupt the exercise of faith, very grievously wound their consciences, and sometimes lose the sense of
God's favor for a time, until on their returning into the right way of serious repentance, the light of God's
fatherly countenance again shines upon them.



                                                                                                                   1
2



Article 6

But God, who is rich in mercy, according to His unchangeable purpose of election, does not wholly withdraw
the Holy Spirit from His own people, even in their melancholy falls; nor suffers them to proceed so far as to
lose the grace of adoption, and forfeit the state of justification, or to commit the sin unto death; nor does He
permit them to be totally deserted, and to plunge themselves into everlasting destruction.



Article 7

For in the first place, in these falls He preserves in them the incorruptible seed of regeneration from perishing
or being totally lost; and again, by His Word and Spirit, certainly and effectually renews them to repentance,
to a sincere and godly sorrow for their sins, that they may seek and obtain remission in the blood of the
Mediator, may again experience the favor of a reconciled God, through faith adore His mercies, and
henceforward more diligently work out their own salvation with fear and trembling.



Article 8

Thus, it is not in consequence of their own merits or strength, but of God's free mercy, that they do not totally
fall from faith and grace, nor continue and perish finally in their backslidings; which, with respect to
themselves, is not only possible, but would undoubtedly happen; but with respect to God, it is utterly
impossible, since His counsel cannot be changed nor His promise fail, neither can the call according to His
purpose be revoked, nor the merit, intercession and preservation of Christ be rendered ineffectual, nor the
sealing of the Holy Spirit be frustrated or obliterated.



Article 9

Of this preservation of the elect to salvation and of their perseverance in the faith, true believers for
themselves may and do obtain assurance according to the measure of their faith, whereby they arrive at the
certain persuasion that they ever will continue true and living members of the church; and that they experience
forgiveness of sins, and will at last inherit eternal life.



Article 10

This assurance, however, is not produced by any peculiar revelation contrary to, or independent of the Word
of God; but springs from faith in God's promises, which He has most abundantly revealed in His Word for our
comfort; from the testimony of the Holy Spirit witnessing with our spirit that we are children and heirs of God
(Rom. 8:16); and lastly, from a serious and holy desire to preserve a good conscience and to perform good
works. And if the elect of God were deprived of this solid comfort that they shall finally obtain the victory and
of this infallible pledge or earnest of eternal glory, they would be of all men the most miserable.



Article 11



2
                                                                                                                    3
The Scripture moreover testifies that believers in this life have to struggle with various carnal doubts and that
under grievous temptations they are not always sensible of this full assurance of faith and certainty of
persevering. But God, who is the Father of all consolation, does not suffer them to be tempted above that they
are able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape that they may be able to bear it (1 Cor.
10:13), and by the Holy Spirit again inspires them with the comfortable assurance of persevering.



Article 12

This certainty of perseverance, however, is so far from exciting in believers a spirit of pride or of rendering
them carnally secure, that on the contrary, it is the real source of humility, filial reverence, true piety, patience
in every tribulation, fervent prayers, constancy in suffering, and in confessing the truth, and of solid rejoicing
in God; so that the consideration of this benefit should serve as an incentive to the serious and constant
practice of gratitude and good works, as appears from the testimonies of Scripture and the examples of the
saints.



Article 13

Neither does renewed confidence of persevering produce licentiousness or a disregard to piety in those who
are recovering from backsliding; but it renders them much more careful and solicitous to continue in the ways
of the Lord, which He hath ordained, that they who walk therein may maintain an assurance of persevering,
lest by abusing His fatherly kindness, God should turn away His gracious countenance from them, to behold
which is to the godly dearer than life, the withdrawing whereof is more bitter than death, and they in
consequence hereof should fall into more grievous torments of conscience.



Article 14

And as it hath pleased God, by the preaching of the gospel, to begin this work of grace in us, so He preserves,
continues, and perfects it by the hearing and reading of His Word, by meditation thereon, and by the
exhortations, threatenings, and promises thereof, as well as by the use of the sacraments.



Article 15

The carnal mind is unable to comprehend this doctrine of the perseverance of the saints and the certainty
thereof, which God hath most abundantly revealed in His Word, for the glory of His Name, and the
consolation of pious souls, and which He impresses upon the hearts of the faithful. Satan abhors it; the world
ridicules it; the ignorant and hypocrite abuse, and heretics oppose it; but the spouse of Christ hath always most
tenderly loved and constantly defended it as an inestimable treasure; and God, against whom neither counsel
nor strength can prevail, will dispose her to continue this conduct to the end. Now, to this one God, Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit, be honor and glory forever. Amen.



___________




                                                                                                                    3
4
The true doctrine (concerning perseverance) having been explained, the Synod rejects the errors of those who
teach:



Rejection 1

That the perseverance of the true believers is not a fruit of election or a gift of God gained by the death of
Christ, but a condition of the new covenant, which (as they declare) man before his decisive election and
justification must fulfill through his free will. For the Holy Scripture testifies that this follows out of election,
and is given the elect in virtue of the death, the resurrection and intercession of Christ: but the election hath
obtained it, and the rest were blinded (Rom. 11:7). Likewise: He that spared not His own Son, but
delivered Him up for us all, how shall He not with Him also freely give us all things? Who shall lay any thing
to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea
rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us. Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ? (Rom. 8:32-35).



Rejection 2

That God does indeed provide the believer with sufficient powers to persevere and is ever ready to preserve
these in him, if he will do his duty; but that though all things which are necessary to persevere in faith and
which God will use to preserve faith are made use of, it even then ever depends on the pleasure of the will
whether it will persevere or not. For this idea contains an outspoken Pelagianism, and while it would make
men free, it makes them robbers of God's honor, contrary to the prevailing agreement of the evangelical
doctrine, which takes from man all cause of boasting and ascribes all the praise for this favor to the grace of
God alone; and contrary to the apostle, who declares that it is God Who shall also confirm you unto the end,
that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ (1 Cor. 1:8).



Rejection 3

That the true believers and regenerate not only can fall from justifying faith and likewise from grace and
salvation wholly and to the end, but indeed often do fall from this and are lost forever. For this conception
makes powerless the grace, justification, regeneration, and continued keeping by Christ, contrary to the
expressed words of the apostle Paul: That, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. Much more then,
being now justified by His blood, we shall be saved from wrath through Him (Rom. 5:8, 9). And contrary to
the apostle John: Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin; for His seed remaineth in him: and he
cannot sin, because he is born of God (1 John 3:9). And also contrary to the words of Jesus Christ: I give
unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of My hand. My
Father, which gave them Me, is greater than all; and no man is able to pluck them out of My Father's hand
(John 10:28, 29).



Rejection 4

That true believers and regenerate can sin the sin unto death or against the Holy Spirit. Since the same
apostle John, after having spoken in the fifth chapter of his first epistle, verses 16 and 17, of those who sin
unto death and having forbidden to pray for them, immediately adds to this in verse 18: We know that
whosoever is born of God sinneth not (meaning a sin of that character); but he that is begotten of God keepeth
himself, and that wicked one toucheth him not (1 John 5:18).


4
                                                                                                                   5



Rejection 5

That without a special revelation we can have no certainty of future perseverance in this life. For by this
doctrine the sure comfort of the true believers is taken away in this life and the doubts of the papist are again
introduced into the church, while the Holy Scriptures constantly deduce this assurance, not from a special and
extraordinary revelation, but from the marks proper to the children of God and from the constant promises of
God. So especially the apostle Paul: Nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord (Rom. 8:39). And John declares: And he that keepeth His
commandments dwelleth in Him, and He in him. And hereby we know that He abideth in us, by the Spirit
which He hath given us (1 John 3:24).



Rejection 6

That the doctrine of the certainty of perseverance and of salvation from its own character and nature is a
cause of indolence and is injurious to godliness, good morals, prayers and other holy exercises, but that on
the contrary it is praiseworthy to doubt. For these show that they do not know the power of divine grace and
the working of the indwelling Holy Spirit. And they contradict the apostle John, who teaches the opposite
with express words in his first epistle: Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what
we shall be: but we know that, when He shall appear, we shall be like Him; for we shall see Him as He is.
And every man that hath this hope in Him purifieth himself, even as He is pure (1 John 3:2-3). Furthermore,
these are contradicted by the example of the saints, both of the Old and the New Testament, who though they
were assured of their perseverance and salvation, were nevertheless constant in prayers and other exercises of
godliness.



Rejection 7

That the faith of those who believe for a time does not differ from justifying and saving faith except only in
duration. For Christ Himself, in Matthew 13:20, Luke 8:13, and in other places, evidently notes, besides this
duration, a threefold difference between those who believe only for a time and true believers, when He
declares that the former receive the seed in stony ground, but the latter in the good ground or heart; that the
former are without root, but the latter have a firm root; that the former are without fruit, but that the latter
bring forth their fruit in various measure with constancy and steadfastness.



Rejection 8

That it is not absurd that one having lost his first regeneration, is again and even often born anew. For these
deny by this doctrine the incorruptibleness of the seed of God, whereby we are born again, contrary to the
testimony of the apostle Peter: Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible (1 Peter
1:23).



Rejection 9

That Christ has in no place prayed that believers should infallibly continue in faith. For they contradict Christ
Himself, who says: I have prayed for thee (Simon), that thy faith fail not (Luke 22:32); and the evangelist


                                                                                                                   5
6
John, who declares that Christ has not prayed for the apostles only, but also for those who through their word
would believe: Holy Father, keep through Thine own name those whom Thou hast given Me, and: I pray
not that Thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that Thou shouldest keep them from the evil ;
 Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on Me through their word (John 17:11,
15, 20).


Previous | Next




6
                                                                                                                  1
Conclusion



And this is the perspicuous, simple, and ingenuous declaration of the orthodox doctrine respecting the five
articles which have been controverted in the Belgic churches, and the rejection of the errors with which they
have for some time been troubled. This doctrine the Synod judges to be drawn from the Word of God and to
be agreeable to the confessions of the Reformed churches. Whence it clearly appears that some whom such
conduct by no means became, have violated all truth, equity, and charity, in wishing to persuade the public:

  That the doctrine of the Reformed churches concerning predestination, and the points annexed to it, by its
own genius and necessary tendency, leads off the minds of men from all piety and religion; that it is an opiate
administered by the flesh and the devil, and the stronghold of Satan, where he lies in wait for all; and from
which he wounds multitudes, and mortally strikes through many with the darts both of despair and security;
that it makes God the author of sin, unjust, tyrannical, hypocritical; that it is nothing more than interpolated
Stoicism, Manicheism, Libertinism, Turcism; that it renders men carnally secure, since they are persuaded by
it that nothing can hinder the salvation of the elect, let them live as they please; and therefore, that they may
safely perpetrate every species of the most atrocious crimes; and that if the reprobate should even perform
truly all the works of the saints, their obedience would not in the least contribute to their salvation; that the
same doctrine teaches that God, by a mere arbitrary act of His will, without the least respect or view to any
sin, has predestinated the greatest part of the world to eternal damnation; and has created them for this very
purpose; that in the same manner in which the election is the fountain and the cause of faith and good works,
reprobation is the cause of unbelief and impiety; that many children of the faithful are torn guiltless from
their mothers' breasts and tyrannically plunged into hell; so that neither baptism nor the prayers of the
Church at their baptism, can at all profit by them ; and many other things of the same kind which the
Reformed Churches not only do not acknowledge, but even detest with their whole soul. Wherefore, this
Synod of Dort, in the name of the Lord, conjures as many as piously call upon the name of our Savior Jesus
Christ, to judge of the faith of the Reformed Churches not from the calumnies, which on every side are heaped
upon it; nor from the private expressions of a few among ancient and modern teachers, often dishonestly
quoted or corrupted and wrested to a meaning quite foreign to their intention; but from the public confessions
of the Churches themselves and from the declaration of the orthodox doctrine, confirmed by the unanimous
consent of all and each of the members of the whole Synod. Moreover, the Synod warns calumniators
themselves to consider the terrible judgment of God which awaits them for bearing false witness against the
confessions of so many churches, for distressing the consciences of the weak, and for laboring to render
suspect the society of the truly faithful. Finally, this Synod exhorts all their brethren in the gospel of Christ to
conduct themselves piously and religiously in handling this doctrine, both in the universities and churches; to
direct it, as well in discourse as in writing, to the glory of the divine Name, to holiness of life, and to the
consolation of afflicted souls; to regulate, by the Scripture, according to the analogy of faith, not only their
sentiments, but also their language; and to abstain from all those phrases which exceed the limits necessary to
be observed in ascertaining the genuine sense of the holy Scriptures, and may furnish insolent sophists with a
just pretext for violently assailing or even vilifying the doctrine of the Reformed churches.

May Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who, seated at the Father's right hand, gives gifts to men, sanctify us in the
truth, bring to the truth those who err, shut the mouths of the calumniators of sound doctrine, and endue the
faithful minister of His Word with the spirit of wisdom and discretion, that all their discourses may tend to the
glory of God and the edification of those who hear them. Amen.

That this is our faith and decision we certify by subscribing our names.



Here follow the names, not only of President, Assistant President, and Secretaries of the Synod, and of the
Professors of Theology in the Dutch Churches, but of all the Members who were deputed to the Synod as the
Representatives of their respective Churches, that is, of the Delegates from Great Britain, the Electoral


                                                                                                                  1
2
Palatinate, Hessia, Switzerland, Wetteraw, The Republic and Church of Geneva, The Republic and Church of
Bremen, The Republic and Church of Emden, The Duchy of Gelderland and of Zutphen, South Holland,
North Holland, Zeeland, The Province of Utrecht, Friesland, Transylvania, The State of Groningen and
Omland, Drent, The French Churches.


Previous




2
                                                                                                              1

Belgic Confession of Faith

Article 1

There Is One Only God

We all believe with the heart, and confess with the mouth, that there is one only simple1 and spiritual2 Being,
which we call God; and that He is eternal,3 incomprehensible,4 invisible,5 immutable,6 infinite,7 almighty,
perfectly wise,8 just,9 good,10 and the overflowing fountain of all good.11, 12

1 Eph. 4:6; Deut. 6:4; 1 Tim. 2:5; 1 Cor. 8:6

2 John 4:24

3 Isa. 40:28

4 Rom. 11:33

5 Rom. 1:20

6 Mal. 3:6

7 Isa. 44:6

8 1 Tim. 1:17

9 Jer. 12:1

10 Matt. 19:17

11 Jas. 1:17; 1 Chron. 29:10-12


Next




                                                                                                              1
2




2
                                                                                                                1
Article 2

By What Means God is Made Known Unto Us

We know Him by two means: first, by the creation, preservation, and government of the universe;1 which is
before our eyes as a most elegant book, wherein all creatures, great and small, are as so many characters
leading us to contemplate the invisible things of God, namely, His eternal power and divinity, as the apostle
Paul saith (Rom. 1:20). All which things are sufficient to convince men, and leave them without excuse.

Secondly, He makes Himself more clearly and fully known to us by His holy and divine Word;2 that is to say,
as far as is necessary for us to know in this life, to His glory and our salvation.

1 Ps. 19:2; Eph. 4:6

2 Ps. 19:8; 1 Cor. 12:6


Previous | Next




                                                                                                                1
2




2
                                                                                                              1

Article 3

The Written Word of God

We confess that this Word of God was not sent nor delivered by the will of man, but that holy men of God
spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, as the apostle Peter saith.1 And that afterwards God, from a
special care which He has for us and our salvation, commanded His servants, the prophets2 and apostles,3 to
commit His revealed Word to writing; and He Himself wrote with His own finger the two tables of the law.4
Therefore we call such writings holy and divine Scriptures.

1 2 Pet. 1:21

2 Ex. 24:4; Ps. 102:19; Hab. 2:2

3 2 Tim. 3:16; Rev. 1:11

4 Ex. 31:18


Previous | Next




                                                                                                              1
2




2
                                                                                                               1
Article 4

Canonical Books of the Holy Scriptures

We believe that the Holy Scriptures are contained in two books, namely, the Old and New Testaments, which
are canonical, against which nothing can be alleged. These are thus named in the Church of God.

The books of the Old Testament are: the five books of Moses, namely, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers,
Deuteronomy; the books of Joshua, Judges, Ruth, the two books of Samuel, the two of the Kings, two books
of the Chronicles, commonly called Paralipomenon, the first of Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Job, the Psalms of
David, the three books of Solomon, namely, the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Songs; the four great
prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Daniel; and the twelve lesser prophets, namely, Hosea, Joel, Amos,
Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi.

Those of the New Testament are: the four Evangelists, namely, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John; the Acts of
the Apostles; the fourteen epistles of the apostle Paul, namely, one to the Romans, two to the Corinthians, one
to the Galatians, one to the Ephesians, one to the Philippians, one to the Colossians, two to the Thessalonians,
two to Timothy, one to Titus, one to Philemon, and one to the Hebrews; the seven epistles of the other
apostles, namely, one of James, two of Peter, three of John, one of Jude; and the Revelation of the apostle
John.


Previous | Next




                                                                                                               1
2




2
                                                                                                             1
Article 5

From Whence the Holy Scriptures Derive Their Dignity and Authority

We receive all these books, and these only, as holy and canonical, for the regulation, foundation, and
confirmation of our faith; believing, without any doubt, all things contained in them, not so much because the
Church receives and approves them as such, but more especially because the Holy Ghost witnesseth in our
hearts that they are from God, whereof they carry the evidence in themselves. For the very blind are able to
perceive that the things foretold in them are fulfilling.


Previous | Next




                                                                                                             1
2




2
                                                                                                               1
Article 6

The Difference Between the Canonical and Apocryphal Books

We distinguish these sacred books from the apocryphal, viz., the third and fourth book of Esdras, the books of
Tobias, Judith, Wisdom, Jesus Syrach, Baruch, the appendix to the book of Esther, the Song of the Three
Children in the Furnace, the History of Susannah, of Bell and the Dragon, the Prayer of Manasses, and the two
books of the Maccabees. All of which the Church may read and take instruction from, so far as they agree
with the canonical books; but they are far from having such power and efficacy as that we may from their
testimony confirm any point of faith or of the Christian religion; much less to detract from the authority of the
other sacred books.


Previous | Next




                                                                                                               1
2




2
                                                                                                              1
Article 7

The Sufficiency of the Holy Scriptures to be the Only Rule of Faith

We believe that those Holy Scriptures fully contain the will of God, and that whatsoever man ought to believe
unto salvation is sufficiently taught therein.1 For since the whole manner of worship which God requires of us
is written in them at large, it is unlawful for any one, though an apostle, to teach otherwise2 than we are now
taught in the Holy Scriptures: nay, though it were an angel from heaven, as the apostle Paul saith.3 For since
it is forbidden to add unto or take away any thing from the Word of God,4 it doth thereby evidently appear
that the doctrine thereof is most perfect and complete in all respects.

Neither do we consider of equal value any writing of men, however holy these men may have been, with those
divine Scriptures;5 nor ought we to consider custom, or the great multitude, or antiquity, or succession of
times and persons, or councils, decrees, or statutes, as of equal value with the truth of God,6 for the truth is
above all; for all men are of themselves liars,7 and more vain than vanity itself. Therefore we reject with all
our hearts whatsoever doth not agree with this infallible rule8 which the apostles have taught us, saying, Try
the spirits whether they are of God.9 Likewise, If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine,
receive him not into your house.10

1 Rom. 15:4; John 4:25; 2 Tim. 3:15-17; 1 Pet. 1:1; Prov. 30:5; Rev. 22:18; John 15:15; Acts 2:27

2 1 Pet. 4:11; 1 Cor. 15:2-3; 2 Tim. 3:14; 1 Tim. 1:3; 2 John 1:10

3 Gal. 1:8-9; 1 Cor. 15:2; Acts 26:22; Rom. 15:4; 1 Pet. 4:11; 2 Tim. 3:14

4 Deut. 12:32; Prov. 30:6; Rev. 22:18; John 4:25

5 Matt. 15:3; 17:5; Mark 7:7; Isa. 1:12; 1 Cor. 2:4

6 Isa. 1:12; Rom. 3:4; 2 Tim. 4:3-4

7 Ps. 62:10

8 Gal. 6:16; 1 Cor. 3:11; 2 Thes. 2:2

9 1 John 4:1

10 2 John 1:10


Previous | Next




                                                                                                              1
2




2
                                                                                                             1
Article 8

God is One in Essence, Yet Distinguished in Three Persons

According to this truth and this Word of God, we believe in one only God, who is one single essence,1 in
which are three persons,2 really, truly, and eternally distinct, according to their incommunicable properties;
namely, the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost.3 The Father is the cause, origin, and beginning of all
things, visible and invisible;4 the Son is the word,5 wisdom,6 and image of the Father;7 the Holy Ghost is the
eternal power and might,8 proceeding from the Father and the Son.9 Nevertheless God is not by this
distinction divided into three, since the Holy Scriptures teach us that the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Ghost have each His personality, distinguished by their properties; but in such wise that these three persons
are but one only God. Hence then, it is evident that the Father is not the Son, nor the Son the Father, and
likewise the Holy Ghost is neither the Father nor the Son. Nevertheless these persons thus distinguished are
not divided nor intermixed; for the Father hath not assumed the flesh, nor hath the Holy Ghost, but the Son
only.10 The Father hath never been without His Son, or without His Holy Ghost. For they are all three
coeternal and coessential. There is neither first nor last; for they are all three one, in truth, in power, in
goodness, and in mercy.

1 Isa. 43:10

2 1 John 5:7; Heb. 1:3

3 Matt. 28:19

4 1 Cor. 8:6; Col. 1:16

5 John 1:1,2; Rev. 19:13; Prov. 8:12

6 Prov. 8:12,22

7 Col. 1:15; Heb. 1:3

8 Matt. 12:28

9 John 15:26; Gal. 4:6

10 Phil. 2:6,7; Gal. 4:4; John 1:14


Previous | Next




                                                                                                             1
2




2
                                                                                                                 1
Article 9

The Proof of the Foregoing Article of the Trinity of Persons in One God

All this we know, as well from the testimonies of Holy Writ as from their operations, and chiefly by those we
feel in ourselves. The testimonies of the Holy Scriptures, that teach us to believe this Holy Trinity, are written
in many places of the Old Testament, which are not so necessary to enumerate as to choose them out with
discretion and judgment. In Genesis 1:26, 27, God saith: Let us make man in our image, after our likeness,
etc.1 So God created man in His own image, male and female created He them. And Genesis 3:22: Behold,
the man is become as one of us.2 From this saying, Let us make man in our image, it appears that there are
more persons than one in the Godhead; and when He saith God created, He signifies the unity. It is true He
doth not say how many persons there are, but that which appears to us somewhat obscure in the Old
Testament is very plain in the New.

For when our Lord was baptized in Jordan,3 the voice of the Father was heard, saying, This is My beloved
Son: the Son was seen in the water, and the Holy Ghost appeared in the shape of a dove. This form is also
instituted by Christ in the baptism of all believers. Baptize all nations, in the name of the Father and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost.4 In the Gospel of Luke the angel Gabriel thus addressed Mary, the mother of our
Lord: The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee, therefore
also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God.5 Likewise, The grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost be with you.6 And, There are
three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one.7 In all
which places we are fully taught that there are three persons in one only divine essence. And although this
doctrine far surpasses all human understanding, nevertheless we now believe it by of the Word of God, but
expect hereafter to enjoy the perfect knowledge and benefit thereof in heaven.8

Moreover we must observe the particular offices and operations of these three persons towards us. The Father
is called our Creator by His power;9 the Son is our Savior and Redeemer by His blood;10 the Holy Ghost is
our Sanctifier by His dwelling in our hearts.11

This doctrine of the Holy Trinity hath always been defended and maintained by the true Church, since the
times of the apostles to this very day, against the Jews, Mohammedans, and some false Christians and
heretics, as Marcion, Manes, Praxeas, Sabellius, Samosatenus, Arius, and such like, who have been justly
condemned by the orthodox fathers.

Therefore, in this point, we do willingly receive the three creeds, namely, that of the Apostles, of Nice, and of
Athanasius; likewise that which, conformable thereunto, is agreed upon by the ancient fathers.

1 Gen. 1:26,27

2 Gen. 3:22

3 Matt. 3:16-17

4 Matt. 28:19

5 Luke 1:35

6 2 Cor. 13:13

7 1 John 5:7

8 Ps. 45:8; Isa. 61:1



                                                                                                                 1
2

9 Eccl. 12:3; Mal. 2:10; 1 Pet. 1:2

10 1 Pet. 1:2; 1 John 1:7; 4:14

11 1 Cor. 6:11; 1 Pet. 1:2; Gal. 4:6; Tit. 3:5; Rom. 8:9; John 14:16


Previous | Next




2
                                                                                                              1
Article 10

Jesus Christ is True and Eternal God

We believe that Jesus Christ, according to His divine nature, is the only begotten Son of God,1 begotten from
eternity,2 not made nor created (for then He would be a creature), but coessential3 and coeternal4 with the
Father, the express image of His person, and the brightness of His glory,5 equal unto Him in all things.6 He is
the Son of God, not only from the time that He assumed our nature, but from all eternity,7 as these
testimonies, when compared together, teach us. Moses saith that God created the world;8 and John saith that
all things were made by that Word, which he calleth God.9 And the apostle saith that God made the worlds by
His Son;10 likewise, that God created all things by Jesus Christ.11 Therefore it must needs follow that He
who is called God, the Word, the Son, and Jesus Christ did exist at that time when all things were created by
Him.12 Therefore the prophet Micah saith: His goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting.13 And
the apostle: He hath neither beginning of days nor end of life.14 He therefore is that true, eternal, and
almighty God, whom we invoke, worship, and serve.

1 John 1:18,49

2 John 1:14; Col. 1:15

3 John 10:30; Phil. 2:6

4 John 1:2; 17:5; Rev. 1:8

5 Heb. 1:3

6 Phil. 2:6

7 John 8:23,58; 9:35-37; Acts 8:37; Rom. 9:5

8 Gen. 1:1

9 John 1:3

10 Heb. 1:2

11 Col. 1:16

12 Col. 1:16

13 Mic. 5:2

14 Heb. 7:3


Previous | Next




                                                                                                              1
2




2
                                                                                                               1

Article 11

The Holy Ghost is True and Eternal God

We believe and confess also that the Holy Ghost from eternity proceeds from the Father1 and Son;2 and
therefore is neither made, created, nor begotten, but only proceedeth from both; who in order is the third
person of the Holy Trinity; of one and the same essence, majesty, and glory with the Father and the Son; and
therefore is the true and eternal God, as the Holy Scriptures teach us.3

1 Ps. 33:6,17; John 14:16

2 Gal. 4:6; Rom. 8:9; John 15:26

3 Gen. 1:2; Isa. 48:16; 61:1; Acts 5:3-4; 28:25; 1 Cor. 3:16; 6:19; Ps. 139:7


Previous | Next




                                                                                                               1
2




2
                                                                                                              1
Article 12

The Creation

We believe that the Father, by the Word, that is, by His Son,1 created of nothing the heaven, the earth, and all
creatures, as it seemed good unto Him, giving unto every creature its being, shape, form, and several offices to
serve its Creator; that He doth also still uphold and govern them by His eternal providence and infinite power2
for the service of mankind,3 to the end that man may serve his God.4

He also created the angels good,5 to be His messengers6 and to serve His elect;7 some of whom are fallen
from that excellency, in which God created them, into everlasting perdition;8 and the others have, by the grace
of God,9 remained steadfast and continued in their primitive state. The devils and evil spirits are so depraved
that they are enemies of God and every good thing, to the utmost of their power,10 as murderers watching to
ruin the Church and every member thereof, and by their wicked strategems to destroy all;11 and are therefore,
by their own wickedness, adjudged to eternal damnation, daily expecting their horrible torments.12 Therefore
we reject and abhor the error of the Sadducees, who deny the existence of spirits and angels;13 and also that
of the Manichees, who assert that the devils have their origin of themselves, and that they are wicked of their
own nature, without having been corrupted.

1 Gen. 1:1; Isa. 40:26; Heb. 3:4; Rev. 4:11; 1 Cor. 8:6; John 1:3; Col. 1:16

2 Heb. 1:3; Ps. 104:10; Acts 17:25

3 1 Tim. 4:3-4; Gen. 1:29-30; 9:2-3; Ps. 104:14-15

4 1 Cor. 3:22; 6:20; Matt. 4:10

5 Col. 1:16

6 Ps. 103:20; 34:8; 148:2

7 Heb. 1:14; Ps. 34:8

8 John 8:44; 2 Pet. 2:4; Luke 8:31; Jude 1:6

9 Matt. 25:31

10 1 Pet. 5:8; Job 1:7

11 Gen. 3:1; Matt. 13:25; 2 Cor. 2:11; 11:3,14

12 Matt. 25:41; Luke 8:30,31

13 Acts 23:8


Previous | Next




                                                                                                              1
2




2
                                                                                                             1
Article 13

Divine Providence

We believe that the same God, after He had created all things, did not forsake them, or give them up to fortune
or chance, but that He rules and governs them according to His holy will,1 so that nothing happens in this
world without His appointment;2 nevertheless, God neither is the author of, nor can be charged with, the sins
which are committed. For His power and goodness are so great and incomprehensible, that He orders and
executes His work in the most excellent and just manner, even then when devils and wicked men act
unjustly.3 And as to what He doth surpassing human understanding, we will not curiously inquire into it
further than our capacity will admit of; but with the greatest humility and reverence adore the righteous
judgments of God which are hid from us,4 contenting ourselves that we are disciples of Christ, to learn only
those things which He has revealed to us in His Word without transgressing these limits.

This doctrine affords us unspeakable consolation, since we are taught thereby that nothing can befall us by
chance, but by the direction of our most gracious and heavenly Father, who watches over us with a paternal
care, keeping all creatures so under His power5 that not a hair of our head (for they are all numbered), nor a
sparrow, can fall to the ground, without the will of our Father,6 in whom we do entirely trust; being persuaded
that He so restrains the devil and all our enemies that, without His will and permission, they cannot hurt us.
And therefore we reject that damnable error of the Epicureans, who say that God regards nothing, but leaves
all things to chance.

1 John 5:17; Heb. 1:3; Prov. 16:4; Ps. 104:9, etc.; Ps. 139:2, etc.

2 Jas. 4:15; Job 1:21; 1 Kings 22:20; Acts 4:28; 1 Sam. 2:25; Ps. 115:3; 45:7; Amos 3:6; Deut. 19:5; Prov.
21:1; Ps. 105:25; Isa. 10:5-7; 2 Thes. 2:11; Ezek. 14:9; Rom. 1:28; Gen. 45:8; 1:20; 2 Sam. 16:10; Gen. 27:20;
Ps. 75:7-8; Isa. 45:7; Prov. 16:4; Lam. 3:37-38; 1 Kings 22:34,38; Ex. 21:13

3 Matt. 8:31,32; John 3:8

4 Rom. 11:33-34

5 Matt. 8:31; Job 1:12; 2:6

6 Matt. 10:29-30


Previous | Next




                                                                                                             1
2




2
                                                                                                                1
Article 14

The Creation and Fall of Man, and His Incapacity to Perform What is Truly Good

We believe that God created man out of the dust of the earth, and made and formed him after His own image
and likeness,1 good, righteous, and holy, capable in all things to will agreeably to the will of God.2 But being
in honor, he understood it not, neither knew his excellency,3 but willfully subjected himself to sin, and
consequently to death and the curse, giving ear to the words of the devil.4 For the commandment of life,
which he had received,5 he transgressed; and by sin separated himself from God6 who was his true life,
having corrupted his whole nature,7 whereby he made himself liable to corporal and spiritual death.8 And
being thus become wicked, perverse, and corrupt in all his ways, he hath lost all his excellent gifts which he
had received from God,9 and only retained a few remains thereof,10 which, however, are sufficient to leave
man without excuse;11 for all the light which is in us is changed into darkness,12 as the Scriptures teach us,
saying: The light shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth13 it not; where St. John calleth men
darkness.

Therefore we reject all that is taught repugnant to this concerning the free will of man, since man is but a slave
to sin,14 and has nothing of himself unless it is given him from heaven.15 For who may presume to boast that
he of himself can do any good, since Christ saith, No man can come to Me, except the Father which hath sent
Me draw him?16 Who will glory in his own will, who understands that to be carnally minded is enmity
against God?17 Who can speak of his knowledge, since the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit
of God?18 In short, who dare suggest any thought, since he knows that we are not sufficient of ourselves to
think any thing as of ourselves, but that our sufficiency is of God?19 And therefore what the apostle saith
ought justly to be held sure and firm, that God worketh in us both to will and to do of His good pleasure.20
For there is no will nor understanding, conformable to the divine will and understanding, but what Christ hath
wrought in man; which He teaches us when He saith, Without Me ye can do nothing.21

1 Gen. 1:26; Eccl. 7:29; Eph. 4:24

2 Gen. 1:31; Eph. 4:24

3 Ps. 49:21; Isa. 59:2

4 Gen. 3:6,17

5 Gen. 1:3,7

6 Isa. 59:2

7 Eph. 4:18

8 Rom. 5:12; Gen. 2:17; 3:19

9 Rom. 3:10

10 Acts 14:16-17; 17:27

11 Rom. 1:20,21; Acts 17:27

12 Eph. 5:8; Matt. 6:23

13 John 1:5

14 Isa. 26:12; Ps. 94:11; John 8:34; Rom. 6:17; 7:5,17


                                                                                                                1
2

15 John 3:27; Isa. 26:12

16 John 3:27; 6:44,65

17 Rom. 8:7

18 1 Cor. 2:14; Ps. 94:11

19 2 Cor. 3:5

20 Phil. 2:13

21 John 15:5


Previous | Next




2
                                                                                                              1
Article 15

Original Sin

We believe that, through the disobedience of Adam, original sin is extended to all mankind;1 which is a
corruption of the whole nature, and an hereditary disease, wherewith infants themselves are infected even in
their mother's womb,2 and which produceth in man all sorts of sin, being in him as a root thereof;3 and
therefore is so vile and abominable in the sight of God that it is sufficient to condemn all mankind.4 Nor is it
by any means abolished or done away by baptism; since sin always issues forth from this woeful source, as
water from a fountain: notwithstanding it is not imputed to the children of God unto condemnation, but by His
grace and mercy is forgiven them. Not that they should rest securely in sin, but that a sense of this corruption
should make believers often to sigh, desiring to be delivered from this body of death.5 Wherefore we reject
the error of the Pelagians, who assert that sin proceeds only from imitation.

1 Rom. 5:12,13; Ps. 51:7; Rom. 3:10; Gen. 6:3; John 3:6; Job 14:4

2 Isa. 48:8; Rom. 5:14

3 Gal. 5:19; Rom. 7:8,10,13,17-18,20,23

4 Eph. 2:3,5

5 Rom. 7:18,24


Previous | Next




                                                                                                              1
2




2
                                                                                                                  1
Article 16

Eternal Election

We believe that all the posterity of Adam, being thus fallen into perdition and ruin by the sin of our first
parents, God then did manifest Himself such as He is; that is to say, merciful and just:1 merciful, since He
delivers and preserves from this perdition all whom He, in His eternal and unchangeable counsel, of mere
goodness hath elected in Christ Jesus our Lord, without any respect to their works;2 just, in leaving others in
the fall and perdition wherein they have involved themselves.3

1 Rom. 9:18,22-23; 3:12

2 Rom. 9:15-16; 11:32; Eph. 2:8-10; Ps. 100:3; 1 John 4:10; Deut. 32:8; 1 Sam. 12:22; Ps. 115:5; Mal. 1:2; 2
Tim. 1:9; Rom. 8:29; 9:11,21; 11:5-6; Eph. 1:4; Tit. 3:4-5; Acts 2:47; 13:48; 2 Tim. 2:19-20; 1 Pet. 1:2; John
6:27; 15:16; 17:9

3 Rom. 9:17,18; 2 Tim. 2:20


Previous | Next




                                                                                                                  1
2




2
                                                                                                          1

Article 17

The Recovery of Fallen Man

We believe that our most gracious God, in His admirable wisdom and goodness, seeing that man had thus
thrown himself into temporal and spiritual death, and made himself wholly miserable, was pleased to seek and
comfort him when he trembling1 fled from His presence, promising him that He would give His Son, who
should be made of a woman, to bruise the head of the serpent, and would make him happy.2

1 Gen. 3:8-9,19; Isa. 65:1-2

2 Heb. 2:14; Gen. 22:18; Isa. 7:14; John 7:42; 2 Tim. 2:8; Heb. 7:14; Gen. 3:15; Gal. 4:4


Previous | Next




                                                                                                          1
2




2
                                                                                                               1
Article 18

Of the Incarnation of Jesus Christ

We confess, therefore, that God did fulfull the promise which He made to the fathers by the mouth of His holy
prophets1 when He sent into the world, at the time appointed by Him, His own only-begotten and eternal Son,
who took upon Him the form of a servant, and became like unto man,2 really assuming the true human nature,
with all its infirmities, sin excepted,3 being conceived in the womb of the blessed Virgin Mary, by the power
of the Holy Ghost, without the means of man;4 and did not only assume human nature as to the body, but also
a true human soul,5 that he might be a real man. For since the soul was lost as well as the body, it was
necessary that he should take both upon him, to save both. Therefore we confess (in opposition to the heresy
of the Anabaptists, who deny that Christ assumed human flesh of His mother) that Christ is become a
partaker of the flesh and blood of the children;6 that He is a fruit of the loins of David after the flesh;7 made
of the seed of David according to the flesh;8 a fruit of the womb of the Virgin Mary;9 made of a woman;10 a
branch of David;11 a shoot of the root of Jesse;12 sprung from the tribe of Judah;13 descended from the Jews
according to the flesh:14 of the seed of Abraham, since He took on Him the seed of Abraham,15 and became
like unto His brethren in all things, sin excepted;16 so that in truth He is our Immanuel, that is to say, God
with us.17

1 Isa. 11:1; Luke 1:55; Gen. 26:4; 2 Sam. 7:12; Ps. 132:11; Acts 13:23

2 1 Tim. 2:5; 3:16; Phil. 2:7

3 Heb. 2:14-15; 4:15

4 Luke 1:31,34-35

5 Matt. 26:38; John 12:27

6 Heb. 2:14

7 Acts 2:30

8 Ps. 132:11; Rom. 1:3

9 Luke 1:42

10 Gal. 4:4

11 Jer. 33:15

12 Isa. 11:1

13 Heb. 7:14

14 Rom. 9:5

15 Gen. 22:18; 2 Sam. 7:12; Matt. 1:1; Gal. 3:16

16 Heb. 2:15-17

17 Isa. 7:14; Matt. 1:23




                                                                                                               1
2

Previous | Next




2
                                                                                                              1
Article 19

The Union and Distinction of the Two Natures in the Person of Christ

We believe that by this conception the person of the Son is inseparably united and connected with the human
nature; so that there are not two Sons of God, nor two persons, but two natures united in one single person; yet
that each nature retains its own distinct properties. As then the divine nature hath always remained uncreated,
without beginning of days or end of life,1 filling heaven and earth, so also hath the human nature not lost its
properties, but remained a creature, having beginning of days, being a finite nature, and retaining all the
properties of a real body.2 And though He hath by His resurrection given immortality to the same,
nevertheless He hath not changed the reality of His human nature; forasmuch as our salvation and resurrection
also depend on the reality of His body.

But these two natures are so closely united in one person, that they were not separated even by His death.
Therefore that which He, when dying, commended into the hands of His Father, was a real human spirit,
departing from His body.3 But in the meantime the divine nature always remained united with the human,
even when He lay in the grave; and the Godhead did not cease to be in Him, any more than it did when He
was an infant, though it did not so clearly manifest itself for a while. Wherefore we confess that He is very
God and very man: very God by His power to conquer death, and very man that He might die for us according
to the infirmity of His flesh.

1 Heb. 7:3

2 1 Cor. 15:13,21; Phil. 3:21; Matt. 26:11; Acts 1:2,11; 3:21; Luke 24:39; John 20:25,27

3 Luke 23:46; Matt. 27:50


Previous | Next




                                                                                                              1
2




2
                                                                                                            1
Article 20

God Hath Manifested His Justice and Mercy in Christ

We believe that God, who is perfectly merciful and just, sent His Son to assume that nature in which the
disobedience was committed, to make satisfaction in the same, and to bear the punishment of sin by His most
bitter passion and death.1 God therefore manifested His justice against His Son when He laid our iniquities2
upon Him, and poured forth His mercy and goodness on us, who were guilty and worthy of damnation, out of
mere and perfect love, giving His Son unto death for us, and raising Him for our justification,3 that through
Him we might obtain immortality and life eternal.

1 Heb. 2:14; Rom. 8:3,32-33

2 Isa. 53:6; John 1:29; 1 John 4:9

3 Rom. 4:25


Previous | Next




                                                                                                            1
2




2
                                                                                                                1
Article 21

The Satisfaction of Christ, Our Only High Priest, For Us

We believe that Jesus Christ is ordained with an oath to be an everlasting High Priest, after the order of
Melchizedek;1 and that He hath presented Himself in our behalf before the Father, to appease His wrath by
His full satisfaction,2 by offering Himself on the tree of the cross, and pouring out His precious blood to
purge away our sins; as the prophets had foretold. For it is written, He was wounded for our transgressions,
He was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon Him, and with His stripes we are
healed. He was brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and numbered with the transgressors;3 and condemned by
Pontius Pilate as a malefactor, though he had first declared Him innocent.4 Therefore, He restored that which
He took not away,5 and suffered the just for the unjust,6 as well in His body as in His soul, feeling the terrible
punishment which our sins had merited; insomuch that His sweat became like unto drops of blood falling on
the ground.7 He called out, My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?8 and hath suffered all this for the
remission of our sins.

Wherefore we justly say with the apostle Paul, that we know nothing but Jesus Christ, and Him crucified;9 we
count all things but loss and dung for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord,10 in whose
wounds we find all manner of consolation. Neither is it necessary to seek or invent any other means of being
reconciled to God, than this only sacrifice, once offered, by which believers are made perfect forever.11 This
is also the reason why He was called by the angel of God, Jesus, that is to say, Savior, because He should save
His people from their sins.12

1 Ps.110:4; Heb. 5:10

2 Col. 1:14; Rom. 5:8-9; Col. 2:14; Heb. 2:17; 9:14; Rom. 3:24; 8:2; John 15:3; Acts 2:24; 13:28; John 3:16; 1
Tim. 2:6

3 Isa. 53:5,7,12

4 Luke 23:22,24; Acts 13:28; Ps. 22:16; John 18:38; Ps. 69:5; 1 Pet. 3:18

5 Ps. 69:5

6 1 Pet. 3:18

7 Luke 22:44

8 Ps. 22:2; Matt. 27:46

9 1 Cor. 2:2

10 Phil. 3:8

11 Heb. 9:25-26; 10:14

12 Matt. 1:21; Acts 4:12


Previous | Next




                                                                                                                1
2




2
                                                                                                                  1
Article 22

Our Justification Through Faith in Jesus Christ

We believe that, to attain the true knowledge of this great mystery, the Holy Ghost kindleth in our hearts an
upright faith, which embraces Jesus Christ with all His merits, appropriates Him,1 and seeks nothing more
besides Him.2 For it must needs follow, either that all things which are requisite to our salvation are not in
Jesus Christ, or if all things are in Him, that then those who possess Jesus Christ through faith have complete
salvation in Him.3 Therefore, for any to assert that Christ is not sufficient, but that something more is required
besides Him, would be too gross a blasphemy; for hence it would follow that Christ was but half a Savior.

1Therefore we justly say with Paul, that we are justified by faith alone, or by faith without works.4 However,
to speak more clearly, we do not mean that faith itself justifies us, for it is only an instrument with which we
embrace Christ our Righteousness. But Jesus Christ, imputing to us all His merits, and so many holy works
which He hath done for us and in our stead, is our Righteousness.5 And faith is an instrument that keeps us in
communion with Him in all His benefits, which, when they become ours, are more than sufficient to acquit us
of our sins.

1 Eph. 3:16-17; Ps. 51:13; Eph. 1:17-18; 1 Cor. 2:12

2 1 Cor. 2:2; Acts 4:12; Gal. 2:21; Jer. 23:6; 1 Cor. 1:30; Jer. 31:10

3 Matt. 1:21; Rom. 3:27; 8:1,33

4 Rom. 3:27; Gal. 2:6; 1 Pet. 1:4-5; Rom. 10:4

5 Jer. 23:6; 1 Cor. 1:30; 2 Tim. 1:2; Luke 1:77; Rom. 3:24-25; 4:5; Ps. 32:1-2; Phil. 3:9; Tit. 3:5; 2 Tim. 1:9


Previous | Next




                                                                                                                  1
2




2
                                                                                                               1
Article 23

Wherein Our Justification Before God Consists

We believe that our salvation consists in the remission of our sins for Jesus Christ's sake, and that therein our
righteousness before God is implied; as David and Paul teach us, declaring this to be the happiness of man,
that God imputes righteousness to him without works.1 And the same apostle saith, that we are justified freely
by His grace, through the redemption which is in Jesus Christ.2

And therefore we always hold fast this foundation, ascribing all the glory to God,3 humbling ourselves before
Him, and acknowledging ourselves to be such as we really are, without presuming to trust in any thing in
ourselves, or in any merit of ours,4 relying and resting upon the obedience of Christ crucified alone,5 which
becomes ours when we believe in Him.6 This is sufficient to cover all our iniquities, and to give us confidence
in approaching to God;7 freeing the conscience of fear, terror, and dread, without following the example of
our first father, Adam, who, trembling, attempted to cover himself with fig-leaves.8 And, verily, if we should
appear before God, relying on ourselves or on any other creature, though ever so little, we should, alas! be
consumed.9 And therefore every one must pray with David: O Lord, enter not into judgment with Thy
servant: for in Thy sight shall no man living be justified.10

1 Luke 1:77; Col. 1:14; Ps. 32:1-2; Rom. 4:6-7

2 Rom. 3:23-24; Acts 4:12

3 Ps. 115:1; 1 Cor. 4:7; Rom. 4:2

4 1 Cor. 4:7; Rom. 4:2; 1 Cor. 1:29,31

5 Rom. 5:19

6 Heb. 11:6-7; Eph. 2:8; 2 Cor. 5:19; 1 Tim. 2:6

7 Rom. 5:1; Eph. 3:12; 1 John 2:1

8 Gen. 3:7

9 Isa. 33:14; Deut. 27:26; James 2:10

10 Ps. 130:3; Matt. 18:23-26; Ps. 143:2; Luke 16:15


Previous | Next




                                                                                                               1
2




2
                                                                                                                 1
Article 24

Man's Sanctification and Good Works

We believe that this true faith, being wrought in man by the hearing of the Word of God and the operation of
the Holy Ghost,1 doth regenerate and make him a new man, causing him to live a new life,2 and freeing him
from the bondage of sin.3 Therefore it is so far from being true, that this justifying faith makes men remiss in
a pious and holy life,4 that on the contrary without it they would never do anything out of love to God, but
only out of self-love or fear of damnation. Therefore it is impossible that this holy faith can be unfruitful in
man; for we do not speak of a vain faith,5 but of such a faith as is called in Scripture a faith that worketh by
love,6 which excites man to the practice of those works which God has commanded in His Word. Which
works, as they proceed from the good root of faith, are good and acceptable in the sight of God, forasmuch as
they are all sanctified by His grace; howbeit they are of no account towards our justification.7 For it is by faith
in Christ that we are justified, even before we do good works;8 otherwise they could not be good works, any
more than the fruit of a tree can be good before the tree itself is good.9

Therefore we do good works, but not to merit by them (for what can we merit?) nay, we are beholden to God
for the good works we do, and not He to us,10 since it is He that worketh in us both to will and to do of His
good pleasure.11 Let us therefore attend to what is written: When ye shall have done all those things which
are commanded you, say we are unprofitable servants: we have done that which was our duty to do.12

In the meantime we do not deny that God rewards our good works, but it is through His grace that He crowns
His gifts.13 Moreover, though we do good works, we do not found our salvation upon them;14 for we can do
no work but what is polluted by our flesh, and also punishable;15 and although we could perform such works,
still the remembrance of one sin is sufficient to make God reject them. Thus, then, we would always be in
doubt, tossed to and fro without any certainty, and our poor consciences would be continually vexed if they
relied not on the merits of the suffering and death of our Savior.16

1 1 Pet. 1:23; Rom. 10:17; John 5:24

2 1 Thes. 1:5; Rom. 8:15; John 6:29; Col. 2:12; Phil. 1:1,29; Eph. 2:8

3 Acts 15:9; Rom. 6:4, 22; Tit. 2:12; John 8:36

4 Tit. 2:12

5 Tit. 3:8; John 15:5; Heb. 11:6; 1 Tim. 1:5

6 1 Tim. 1:5; Gal. 5:6; Tit. 3:8

7 2 Tim. 1:9; Rom. 9:32; Tit. 3:5

8 Rom. 4:4; Gen. 4:4

9 Heb. 11:6; Rom. 14:23; Gen. 4:4; Matt. 7:17

10 1 Cor. 4:7; Isa. 26:12; Gal. 3:5; 1 Thes. 2:13

11 Phil. 2:13

12 Luke 17:10

13 Matt. 10:42; 25:34-35; Rev. 3:12,21; Rom. 2:6; Rev. 2:11; 2 John 1:8; Rom. 11:6



                                                                                                                 1
2

14 Eph. 2:9-10

15 Isa. 64:6

16 Isa. 28:16; Rom. 10:11; Hab. 2:4


Previous | Next




2
                                                                                                                1
Article 25

The Abolishing of the Ceremonial Law

We believe that the ceremonies and figures of the law ceased at the coming of Christ,1 and that all the
shadows are accomplished; so that the use of them must be abolished among Christians;2 yet the truth and
substance of them remain with us in Jesus Christ, in whom they have their completion. In the meantime we
still use the testimonies taken out of the law and the prophets, to confirm us in the doctrine of the gospel,3 and
to regulate our life in all honesty to the glory of God, according to His will.

1 Rom. 10:4

2 Gal. 5:2-4; 3:1; 4:10-11; Col. 2:16-17

3 2 Pet. 1:19


Previous | Next




                                                                                                                1
2




2
                                                                                                                  1
Article 26

Christ's Intercession

We believe that we have no access unto God but alone through the only Mediator and Advocate, Jesus Christ
the righteous,1 Who therefore became man, having united in one person the divine and human natures, that
we men might have access to the divine Majesty, which access would otherwise be barred against us. But this
Mediator, whom the Father hath appointed between Him and us, ought in no wise affright us by His majesty,
or cause us to seek another according to our fancy.2 For there is no creature, either in heaven or on earth, who
loveth us more than Jesus Christ;3 who, though He was in the form of God, yet made Himself of no reputation,
and took upon Him the form of a man and of a servant for us,4 and was made like unto His brethren in all
things. If, then, we should seek for another mediator, who would be well affected towards us, whom could we
find who loved us more than He who laid down His life for us, even when we were His enemies?5 And if we
seek for one who hath power and majesty, who is there that hath so much of both as He who sits at the right
hand of His Father, and who hath all power in heaven and on earth?6 And who will sooner be heard than the
own well-beloved Son of God?

Therefore it was only through distrust that this practice of dishonoring instead of honoring the saints was
introduced, doing that which they never have done nor required, but have, on the contrary, steadfastly
rejected, according to their bounden duty, as appears by their writings.7 Neither must we plead here our
unworthiness; for the meaning is not that we should offer our prayers to God on account of our own
worthiness, but only on account of the excellency and worthiness of the Lord Jesus Christ,8 whose
righteousness is become ours by faith.

Therefore the apostle, to remove this foolish fear or, rather, distrust from us, justly saith that Jesus Christ was
made like unto His brethren in all things, that He might be a merciful and faithful High Priest, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in that He Himself hath suffered, being tempted, He is able to
succor them that are tempted.9 And further to encourage us, he adds: Seeing, then, that we have a great High
Priest that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession. For we have not a
High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as
we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and
find grace to help in time of need.10 The same apostle saith: Having boldness to enter into the holiest by the
blood of Jesus, let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, etc.11 Likewise, Christ hath an
unchangeable priesthood, wherefore He is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by
Him, seeing He ever liveth to make intercession for them.12

What more can be required? since Christ Himself saith: I am the way, and the truth, and the life; no man
cometh unto the Father but by Me.13 To what purpose should we then seek another advocate,14 since it hath
pleased God to give us His own Son as our Advocate?15 Let us not forsake Him to take another, or rather to
seek after another, without ever being able to find Him; for God well knew, when He gave Him to us, that we
were sinners.

Therefore, according to the command of Christ, we call upon the heavenly Father through Jesus Christ our
only Mediator, as we are taught in the Lord's Prayer;16 being assured that whatever we ask of the Father in
His Name will be granted us.17

1 1 Tim. 2:5; 1 John 2:1; Rom. 8:33

2 Hos. 13:9; Jer. 2:13,33

3 John 10:11; 1 John 4:10; Rom. 5:8; Eph. 3:19; John 15:13

4 Phil. 2:7



                                                                                                                  1
2

5 Rom. 5:8

6 Mark 16:19; Col. 3:1; Rom. 8:33; Matt. 11:27; 28:18

7 Acts 10:26; 14:15

8 Dan. 9:17-18; John 16:23; Eph. 3:12; Acts 4:12; 1 Cor. 1:31; Eph. 2:18

9 Heb. 2:17,18

10 Heb. 4:14-16

11 Heb. 10:19,22

12 Heb. 7:24,25

13 John 14:6

14 Ps. 44:21

15 1 Tim. 2:5; 1 John 2:1; Rom. 8:33

16 Luke 11:2

17 John 4:17; 16:23; 14:13


Previous | Next




2
                                                                                                                1
Article 27

The Catholic Christian Church

We believe and profess one catholic or universal Church,1 which is a holy congregation of true Christian
believers, all expecting their salvation in Jesus Christ, being washed by His blood, sanctified and sealed by the
Holy Ghost.

This Church hath been from the beginning of the world, and will be to the end thereof;2 which is evident from
this, that Christ is an eternal king, which, without subjects He cannot be.3 And this holy Church is preserved
or supported by God against the rage of the whole world;4 though she sometimes (for a while) appears very
small, and, in the eyes of men, to be reduced to nothing;5 as during the perilous reign of Ahab, when
nevertheless the Lord reserved unto Him seven thousand men, who had not bowed their knees to Baal.6

Furthermore, this holy Church is not confined, bound, or limited to a certain place or to certain persons, but is
spread and dispersed over the whole world; and yet is joined and united with heart and will,7 by the power of
faith, in one and the same spirit.8

1 Isa. 2:2; Ps. 46:5; 102:14; Jer. 31:36

2 Matt. 28:20; 2 Sam. 7:16

3 Luke 1:32-33; Ps. 89:37-38; 110:2-4

4 Matt. 16:18; John 16:33; Gen. 22:17; 2 Tim. 2:19

5 Luke 12:32; Isa. 1:9; Rev. 12:6,14; Luke 17:21; Matt. 16:18

6 Rom. 12:4; 11:2,4; 1 Kings 19:18; Isa. 1:9; Rom. 9:29

7 Acts 4:32

8 Eph. 4:3-4


Previous | Next




                                                                                                                1
2




2
                                                                                                                1
Article 28

Every One is Bound to Join Himself to the True Church

We believe, since this holy congregation is an assembly of those who are saved, and out of it there is no
salvation,1 that no person of whatsoever state or condition he may be, ought to withdraw himself to live in a
separate state from it;2 but that all men are in duty bound to join and unite themselves with it; maintaining the
unity of the Church;3 submitting themselves to the doctrine and discipline thereof; bowing their necks under
the yoke of Jesus Christ;4 and as mutual members of the same body,5 serving to the edification of the
brethren, according to the talents God has given them.

And that this may be the more effectually observed, it is the duty of all believers, according to the Word of
God, to separate themselves from those who do not belong to the Church,6 and to join themselves to this
congregation, wheresoever God hath established it,7 even though the magistrates and edicts of princes be
against it; yea, though they should suffer death or any other corporal punishment.8 Therefore all those who
separate themselves from the same, or do not join themselves to it, act contrary to the ordinance of God.

1 1 Pet. 3:20; Joel 2:32

2 Acts 2:40; Isa. 52:11

3 Ps. 22:23; Eph. 4:3,12; Heb. 2:12

4 Ps. 2:10-12; Matt. 11:29

5 Eph. 4:12,16; 1 Cor. 12:12, etc.

6 Acts 2:40; Isa. 52:11; 2 Cor. 6:17; Rev. 18:4

7 Matt. 12:30; 24:28; Isa. 49:22; Rev. 17:14

8 Dan. 3:17-18; 6:8-10; Rev. 14:14; Acts 4:17,19; 17:7; 18:13


Previous | Next




                                                                                                                1
2




2
                                                                                                                     1
Article 29

The Marks of the True Church, and Wherein She Differs From the False Church

We believe that we ought diligently and circumspectly to discern from the Word of God which is the true
Church, since all sects which are in the world assume to themselves the name of the Church. But we speak
here not of hypocrites, who are mixed in the Church with the good, yet are not of the Church, though
externally in it;1 but we say that the body and communion of the true Church must be distinguished from all
sects who call themselves the Church.

The marks by which the true Church is known are these: if the pure doctrine of the gospel is preached
therein;2 if she maintains the pure administration of the sacraments as instituted by Christ;3 if church
discipline is exercised in punishing of sin;4 in short, if all things are managed according to the pure Word of
God, all things contrary thereto rejected,5 and Jesus Christ acknowledged as the only Head of the Church.6
Hereby the true Church may certainly be known, from which no man has a right to separate himself.

With respect to those who are members of the Church, they may be known by the marks of Christians,
namely, by faith;7 and when they have received Jesus Christ the only Savior,8 they avoid sin, follow after
righteousness,9 love the true God and their neighbor, neither turn aside to the right or left, and crucify the
flesh with the works thereof.10 But this is not to be understood as if there did not remain in them great
infirmities; but they fight against them through the Spirit all the days of their life,11 continually taking their
refuge in the blood, death, passion, and obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom they have remission of
sins through faith in Him.12

As for the false Church, she ascribes more power and authority to herself and her ordinances than to the Word
of God,13 and will not submit herself to the yoke of Christ.14 Neither does she administer the sacraments, as
appointed by Christ in His Word, but adds to and takes from them as she thinks proper; she relieth more upon
men than upon Christ; and persecutes those who live holily according to the Word of God,15 and rebuke her
for her errors, covetousness, and idolatry.16 These two Churches are easily known and distinguished from
each other.

1 Matt. 13:22; 2 Tim. 2:18-20; Rom. 9:6

2 John 10:27; Eph. 2:20; Acts 17:11-12; Col. 1:23; John 8:47

3 Matt. 28:19; Luke 22:19; 1 Cor. 11:23

4 Matt. 18:15-18; 2 Thes. 3:14-15

5 Matt. 28:2; Gal. 1:6-8

6 Eph. 1:22-23; John 10:4-5,14

7 Eph. 1:13; John 17:20

8 1 John 4:2

9 1 John 3:8-10

10 Rom. 6:2; Gal. 5:24

11 Rom. 7:6,17; Gal. 5:17

12 Col. 1:14


                                                                                                                     1
2

13 Col. 2:18-19

14 Ps. 2:3

15 Rev. 12:4; John 16:2

16 Rev. 17:3,4,6


Previous | Next




2
                                                                                                            1
Article 30

The Government of and Offices in the Church

We believe that this true Church must be governed by the spiritual policy which our Lord hath taught us in
His Word namely, that there must be ministers or pastors to preach the Word of God, and to administer the
sacraments;1 also elders and deacons, who, together with the pastors, form the council of the Church;2 that by
these means the true religion may be preserved, and the true doctrine everywhere propagated, likewise
transgressors punished and restrained by spiritual means;3 also that the poor and distressed may be relieved
and comforted, according to their necessities. By these means everything will be carried on in the Church with
good order and decency, when faithful men are chosen, according to the rule prescribed by St. Paul in his
Epistle to Timothy.4

1 Eph. 4:11; 1 Cor. 4:1-2; 2 Cor. 5:20; John 20:23; Acts 26:17-18; Luke 10:16

2 Acts 6:3; 14:23

3 Matt. 18:17; 1 Cor. 5:4-5

4 1 Tim. 3:1; Tit. 1:5


Previous | Next




                                                                                                            1
2




2
                                                                                                               1
Article 31

The Ministers, Elders, and Deacons

We believe that the ministers of God's Word,1 and the elders and deacons,2 ought to be chosen to their
respective offices by a lawful election of the Church, with calling upon the name of the Lord, and in that order
which the Word of God teacheth. Therefore every one must take heed not to intrude himself by indecent
means, but is bound to wait till it shall please God to call him;3 that he may have testimony of his calling, and
be certain and assured that it is of the Lord.

As for the ministers of God's Word, they have equally the same power and authority wheresoever they are, as
they are all ministers of Christ,4 the only universal Bishop, and the only Head of the Church.5

Moreover, that this holy ordinance of God may not be violated or slighted, we say that every one ought to
esteem the ministers of God's Word and the elders of the Church very highly for their work's sake, and be at
peace with them without murmuring, strife, or contention,6 as much as possible.

1 1 Tim. 5:22

2 Acts 6:3

3 Jer. 23:21; Heb. 5:4; Acts 1:23; 13:2

4 1 Cor. 4:1; 3:9; 2 Cor. 5:20; Acts 26:16-17

5 1 Pet. 2:25; 5:4; Isa. 61:1; Eph. 1:22; Col. 1:18

6 1 Thes. 5:12,13; 1 Tim. 5:17; Heb. 13:17


Previous | Next




                                                                                                               1
2




2
                                                                                                               1
Article 32

The Order and Discipline of the Church

In the meantime we believe, though it is useful and beneficial, that those who are rulers of the Church institute
and establish certain ordinances among themselves for maintaining the body of the Church; yet they ought
studiously to take care that they do not depart from those things which Christ, our only Master, hath
instituted.1 And therefore, we reject all human inventions, and all laws which man would introduce into the
worship of God, thereby to bind and compel the conscience in any manner whatever.2

Therefore we admit only of that which tends to nourish and preserve concord and unity, and to keep all men in
obedience to God. For this purpose excommunication or church discipline is requisite, with the several
circumstances belonging to it, according to the Word of God.3

1 Col. 2:6-7

2 1 Cor. 7:23; Matt. 15:9; Isa. 29:13; Gal. 5:1; Rom. 16:17-18

3 Matt. 18:17; 1 Cor. 5:5; 1 Tim. 1:20


Previous | Next




                                                                                                               1
2




2
                                                                                                                 1
Article 33

The Sacraments

We believe that our gracious God, on account of our weakness and infirmities, hath ordained the sacraments
for us, thereby to seal unto us His promises,1 and to be pledges of the good will and grace of God toward us,
and also to nourish and strengthen our faith, which He hath joined to the Word of the gospel, the better to
present to our senses, both that which He signifies to us by His Word, and that which He works inwardly in
our hearts, thereby assuring and confirming in us the salvation which He imparts to us. For they are visible
signs and seals of an inward and invisible thing, by means whereof God worketh in us by the power of the
Holy Ghost. Therefore the signs are not in vain or insignificant, so as to deceive us. For Jesus Christ is the
true object presented by them, without whom they would be of no moment.2

Moreover, we are satisfied with the number of sacraments which Christ our Lord hath instituted, which are
two only, namely, the sacrament of baptism, and the holy supper of our Lord Jesus Christ.3

1 Rom. 4:11; Gen. 9:13; 17:11

2 Col. 2:11,17; 1 Cor. 5:7

3 Matt. 26:36; 28:19


Previous | Next




                                                                                                                 1
2




2
                                                                                                               1
Article 34

Holy Baptism

We believe and confess that Jesus Christ, who is the end of the law,1 hath made an end, by the shedding of
His blood, of all other sheddings of blood which men could or would make as a propitiation or satisfaction for
sin; and that He, having abolished circumcision, which was done with blood, hath instituted the sacrament of
baptism2 instead thereof, by which we are received into the Church of God, and separated from all other
people and strange religions, that we may wholly belong to Him whose ensign and banner we bear, and which
serves as a testimony unto us that He will forever be our gracious God and Father.

Therefore He has commanded all those who are His to be baptized with pure water, in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,3 thereby signifying to us, that as water washeth away the filth of the
body, when poured upon it, and is seen on the body of the baptized, when sprinkled upon him, so doth the
blood of Christ, by the power of the Holy Ghost, internally sprinkle the soul, cleanse it from its sins, and
regenerate us from children of wrath unto children of God.4 Not that this is effected by the external water, but
by the sprinkling of the precious blood of the Son of God;5 who is our Red Sea, through which we must pass
to escape the tyranny of Pharaoh, that is, the devil, and to enter into the spiritual land of Canaan.

Therefore the ministers, on their part, administer the sacrament, and that which is visible,6 but our Lord giveth
that which is signified by the sacrament, namely, the gifts and invisible grace; washing, cleansing, and
purging our souls of all filth and unrighteousness;7 renewing our hearts and filling them with all comfort;
giving unto us a true assurance of His fatherly goodness; putting on us the new man, and putting off the old
man with all his deeds.8

Therefore we believe that every man who is earnestly studious of obtaining life eternal ought to be but once
baptized with this only baptism, without ever repeating the same,9 since we cannot be born twice. Neither
doth this baptism only avail us at the time when the water is poured upon us and received by us, but also
through the whole course of our life.10

Therefore we detest the error of the Anabaptists, who are not content with the one only baptism they have
once received, and moreover condemn the baptism of the infants of believers, whom we believe ought to be
baptized and sealed with the sign of the covenant,11 as the children in Israel formerly were circumcised12
upon the same promises which are made unto our children. And indeed, Christ shed His blood no less for the
washing of the children of the faithful than for adult persons;13 and therefore, they ought to receive the sign
and sacrament of that which Christ hath done for them; as the Lord commanded in the law, that they should be
made partakers of the sacrament of Christ's suffering and death shortly after they were born, by offering for
them a lamb, which was a sacrament of Jesus Christ.14 Moreover, what circumcision was to the Jews, that
baptism is to our children. And for this reason Paul calls baptism the circumcision of Christ.15

1 Rom. 10:4

2 Col. 2:11; 1 Pet. 3:21; 1 Cor. 10:2

3 Matt. 28:19

4 1 Cor. 6:11; Tit. 3:5; Heb. 9:14; 1 John 1:7; Rev. 1:6

5 John 19:34

6 Matt. 3:11; 1 Cor. 3:5,7; Rom. 6:3

7 Eph. 5:26; Acts 22:16; 1 Pet. 3:21



                                                                                                               1
2

8 Gal. 3:27; 1 Cor. 12:13; Eph. 4:22-24

9 Mark 16:16; Matt. 28:19; Eph. 4:5; Heb. 6:2

10 Acts 2:38; 8:16

11 Matt. 19:14; 1 Cor. 7:14

12 Gen. 17:11-12

13 Col. 2:11-12

14 John 1:29; Lev. 12:6

15 Col. 2:11


Previous | Next




2
                                                                                                                1
Article 35

The Holy Supper of Our Lord Jesus Christ

We believe and confess that our Savior Jesus Christ did ordain and institute the sacrament of the Holy
Supper,1 to nourish and support those whom He hath already regenerated and incorporated into His family,
which is His Church.

Now those who are regenerated have in them a twofold life,2 the one corporal and temporal, which they have
from the first birth, and is common to all men; the other spiritual and heavenly, which is given them in their
second birth,3 which is effected by the word of the gospel,4 in the communion of the body of Christ; and this
life is not common, but is peculiar to God's elect.5 In like manner God hath given us, for the support of the
bodily and earthly life, earthly and common bread, which is subservient thereto, and is common to all men,
even as life itself. But for the support of the spiritual and heavenly life which believers have, He hath sent a
living bread, which descended from heaven, namely, Jesus Christ,6 who nourishes and strengthens the
spiritual life of believers, when they eat Him, that is to say, when they apply and receive Him by faith, in the
Spirit.7

Christ, that He might represent unto us this spiritual and heavenly bread, hath instituted an earthly and visible
bread as a sacrament of His body, and wine as a sacrament of His blood,8 to testify by them unto us, that, as
certainly as we receive and hold this sacrament in our hands, and eat and drink the same with our mouths, by
which our life is afterwards nourished, we also do as certainly receive by faith (which is the hand and mouth
of our soul) the true body and blood of Christ our only Savior in our souls, for the support of our spiritual
life.9

Now as it is certain and beyond all doubt that Jesus Christ hath not enjoined to us the use of His sacraments in
vain, so He works in us all that He represents to us by these holy signs, though the manner surpasses our
understanding, and cannot be comprehended by us, as the operations of the Holy Ghost are hidden and
incomprehensible. In the meantime we err not when we say that what is eaten and drunk by us is the proper
and natural body, and the proper blood, of Christ.10 But the manner of our partaking of the same is not by the
mouth, but by the Spirit through faith. Thus, then, though Christ always sits at the right hand of His Father in
the heavens,11 yet doth He not, therefore, cease to make us partakers of Himself by faith. This feast is a
spiritual table, at which Christ communicates Himself with all His benefits to us, and gives us there to enjoy
both Himself and the merits of His sufferings and death,12 nourishing, strengthening, and comforting our
poor comfortless souls, by the eating of His flesh, quickening and refreshing them by the drinking of His
blood.13

Further, though the sacraments are connected with the thing signified, nevertheless both are not received by
all men; the ungodly indeed receives the sacrament to his condemnation,14 but he doth not receive the truth of
the sacrament. As Judas and Simon the sorcerer, both indeed received the sacrament, but not Christ who was
signified by it, of whom believers only are made partakers.

Lastly, we receive this holy sacrament in the assembly of the people of God, with humility and reverence,15
keeping up among us a holy remembrance of the death of Christ our Savior, with thanksgiving, making there
confession of our faith and of the Christian religion. Therefore no one ought to come to this table without
having previously rightly examined himself; lest by eating of this bread and drinking of this cup he eat and
drink judgment to himself.16 In a word, we are excited by the use of this holy sacrament to a fervent love
towards God and our neighbor.

Therefore we reject all mixtures and damnable inventions, which men have added unto and blended with the
sacraments, as profanations of them, and affirm that we ought to rest satisfied with the ordinance which Christ
and His apostles have taught us, and that we must speak of them in the same manner as they have spoken.

1 Matt. 26:26; Mark 14:22; Luke 22:19; 1 Cor. 11:23-25


                                                                                                                1
2

2 John 3:6

3 John 3:5

4 John 5:23,25

5 1 John 5:12; John 10:28

6 John 6:32-33,51

7 John 6:63

8 Mark 6:26

9 1 Cor. 10:16-17; Eph. 3:17; John 6:35

10 John 6:55-56; 1 Cor. 10:16

11 Acts 3:21; Mark 16:19; Matt. 26:11

12 Matt. 26:26, etc.; Luke 22:19-20; 1 Cor. 10:2-4

13 Isa. 55:2; Rom. 8:22-23

14 1 Cor. 11:29; 2 Cor. 6:14-15; 1 Cor. 2:14

15 Acts 2:42; 20:7

16 1 Cor. 11:27-28


Previous | Next




2
                                                                                                                1
Article 36

The Magistrates

We believe that our gracious God, because of the depravity of mankind, hath appointed kings, princes, and
magistrates,1 willing that the world should be governed by certain laws and policies; to the end that the
dissoluteness of men might be restrained, and all things carried on among them with good order and decency.
For this purpose He hath invested the magistracy with the sword, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the
praise of them that do well. And their office is, not only to have regard unto and watch for the welfare of the
civil state, but also that they protect the sacred ministry, and thus may remove and prevent all idolatry and
false worship;2 that the kingdom of antichrist may be thus destroyed, and the kingdom of Christ promoted.
They must, therefore, countenance the preaching of the word of the gospel everywhere, that God may be
honored and worshipped by every one, as He commands in His Word.

Moreover, it is the bounden duty of every one, of what state, quality, or condition soever he may be, to subject
himself to the magistrates;3 to pay tribute,4 to show due honor and respect to them, and to obey them in all
things which are not repugnant to the Word of God;5 to supplicate for them in their prayers, that God may
rule and guide them in all their ways, and that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty.6

Wherefore we detest the error of the Anabaptists and other seditious people, and in general all those who
reject the higher powers and magistrates, and would subvert justice,7 introduce a community of goods, and
confound that decency and good order which God hath established among men.8

1 Ex. 18:20, etc.; Rom. 13:1; Prov. 8:15; Jer. 21:12; 22:2-3; Ps. 82:1,6; 101:2; Deut. 1:15-16; 16:18; 17:15;
Dan. 2:21,37; 5:18

2 Isa. 49:23,25; 1 Kings 15:12; 2 Kings 23:2-4

3 Tit. 3:1; Rom. 13:1

4 Mark 12:17; Matt. 17:24

5 Acts 4:17-19; 5:29; Hos. 5:11

6 Jer. 29:7; 1 Tim. 2:1-2

7 2 Pet. 2:10

8 Jude 1:8, 10


Previous | Next




                                                                                                                1
2




2
                                                                                                               1
Article 37

The Last Judgment

Finally, we believe, according to the Word of God, when the time appointed by the Lord (which is unknown
to all creatures)1 is come, and the number of the elect complete, that our Lord Jesus Christ will come from
heaven, corporally and visibly, as He ascended,2 with great glory and majesty, to declare Himself Judge of the
quick and the dead,3 burning this old world with fire and flame to cleanse it.4 And then all men will
personally appear before this great Judge, both men and women and children, that have been from the
beginning of the world to the end thereof,5 being summoned by the voice of the archangel, and by the sound
of the trumpet of God.6 For all the dead shall be raised out of the earth, and their souls joined and united with
their proper bodies in which they formerly lived.7 As for those who shall then be living, they shall not die as
the others, but be changed in the twinkling of an eye, and from corruptible become incorruptible.8

Then the books (that is to say, the consciences) shall be opened, and the dead judged according to what they
shall have done in this world, whether it be good or evil.9 Nay, all men shall give an account of every idle
word they have spoken, which the world only counts amusement and jest;10 and then the secrets and
hypocrisy of men shall be disclosed and laid open before all.11

And, therefore, the consideration of this judgment is justly terrible and dreadful to the wicked and ungodly,12
but most desirable and comfortable to the righteous and the elect; because then their full deliverance shall be
perfected, and there they shall receive the fruits of their labor and trouble which they have borne.13 Their
innocence shall be known to all, and they shall see the terrible vengeance which God shall execute on the
wicked,14 who most cruelly persecuted, oppressed, and tormented them in this world;15 and who shall be
convicted by the testimony of their own consciences,16 and, being immortal, shall be tormented in that
everlasting fire17 which is prepared for the devil and his angels.18

But on the contrary, the faithful and elect shall be crowned with glory and honor;19 and the Son of God will
confess their names before God His Father, and His elect angels;20 all tears shall be wiped from their eyes;21
and their cause, which is now condemned by many judges and magistrates as heretical and impious, will then
be known to be the cause of the Son of God.22 And for a gracious reward, the Lord will cause them to possess
such a glory as never entered into the heart of man to conceive.23

Therefore we expect that great day with a most ardent desire, to the end that we may fully enjoy the promises
of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.24 Amen.

Even so, come, Lord Jesus (Rev. 22:20).

1 Matt. 24:36; 25:13; 1 Thes. 5:1-2; Rev. 6:11; Acts 1:7; 2 Pet. 3:10

2 Acts 1:11

3 2 Thes. 1:7-8; Acts 17:31; Matt. 24:30; 25:31; Jude 1:15; 1 Pet. 4:5; 2 Tim. 4:1

4 2 Pet. 3:7,10; 2 Thes. 1:8

5 Rev. 20:12-13; Acts 17:31; Heb. 6:2; 9:27; 2 Cor. 5:10; Rom. 14:10

6 1 Cor. 15:42; Rev. 20:12-13; 1 Thes. 4:16

7 John 5:28-29; 6:54; Dan. 12:2; Job 19;26-27

8 1 Cor. 15:51-53



                                                                                                               1
2

9 Rev. 20:12-13; 1 Cor. 4:5; Rom. 14:11-12; Job 34:11; John 5:24; Dan. 12:2; Ps. 62:13; Matt. 11:22; 23:33;
John 5:29; Rom. 2:5-6; 2 Cor. 5:10; Heb. 6:2; 9:27

10 Rom. 2:5; Jude 1:15; Matt. 12:36

11 1 Cor. 4:5; Rom. 2:1-2,16; Matt. 7:1-2

12 Rev. 6:15-16; Heb. 10:27

13 Luke 21:28; 1 John 3:2; 4:17; Rev. 14:7; 2 Thes. 1:5-7; Luke 14:14

14 Dan. 7:26

15 Matt. 25:46; 2 Thes. 1:6-8; Mal. 4:3

16 Rom. 2:15

17 Rev. 21:8; 2 Pet. 2:9

18 Mal. 4:1; Matt. 25:41

19 Matt. 25:34; 13:43

20 Matt. 10:32

21 Isa. 25:8; Rev. 21:4

22 Isa. 66:5

23 Isa. 64:4; 1 Cor. 2:9

24 Heb. 10:36-38


Previous




2
                                                                                                                1

The Heidelberg Catechism,

or

METHOD OF INSTRUCTION IN THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION.

AS THE SAME IS TAUGHT IN THE REFORMED CHURCHES AND SCHOOLS

IN HOLLAND AND IN AMERICA.

LORD'S DAY 1

Question 1. What is thy only comfort in life and death?

Answer: That I with 1body and soul, both in life and death, 2am not my own, but belong 3unto my faithful
Savior Jesus Christ; who, with His precious 4blood, hath fully 5satisfied for all my sins, and delivered 6me
from all the power of the devil; and so preserves me 7that without the will of my heavenly Father, not a hair
8can fall from my head; yea, that all things must be 9subservient to my salvation, and therefore, by His Holy

Spirit, He also assures me 10of eternal life, and makes 11me sincerely willing and ready, henceforth, to live
unto Him.

Question 2. How many things are necessary for thee to know, that thou, enjoying this comfort, mayest live
and die happily?

Answer: Three; 12the first, how great 13my sins and miseries are; the second, how I may be delivered 14from
all my sins and miseries; the third, how I shall express my gratitude 15to God for such deliverance.

1   1 Cor. 6:19-20

2   Rom. 14:7-9

3   1 Cor. 3:23

4   1 Pet. 1:18-19

5   John 1:7

6   1 John 3:8; Heb. 2:14-15

7   John 6:39; John 10:28-29

8   Luke 21:18; Matt. 10:30

9   Rom. 8:28

10   2 Cor. 1:22; 2 Cor. 5:5

11   Rom. 8:14; Rom. 7:22

12   Luke 24:47

13   1 Cor. 6:10-11; John 9:41; Rom. 3:10, 19

14   John 17:3


                                                                                                                1
2
15   Eph. 5:8-10;

THE FIRST PART - OF THE MISERY OF MAN

LORD'S DAY 2

Question 3. Whence knowest thou thy misery?

Answer: Out of the law of God.1

Question 4. What doth the law of God require of us?

Answer: Christ teaches us that briefly, Matt. 22:37-40, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength. 2This is the first and the great
commandment; and the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. On these two
commandments hang all the law and the prophets."

Question 5. Canst thou keep all these things perfectly?

Answer: In no wise; 3for I am prone by nature to hate God and my neighbor.4

1   Rom 3:20

2   Luke 10:27

3   Rom. 3:10; John 1:8;

4   Rom. 8:7; Tit. 3:3;

LORD'S DAY 3

Question 6. Did God then create man so wicked and perverse?

Answer: By no means; but God created man good, 1and after His own image, in 2true righteousness and
holiness, that he might rightly know God his Creator, heartily love Him and live with Him in eternal
happiness to glorify and praise Him.3

Question 7. Whence then proceeds this depravity of human nature?

Answer: From the fall and disobedience of our first parents, Adam and Eve, 4in Paradise; hence our nature is
become so corrupt, that we are all conceived and born in sin.5

Question 8. Are we then so corrupt that we are wholly incapable of doing any good, and inclined to all
wickedness?

Answer: Indeed we are; 6except we are regenerated by the Spirit of God.7

1   Gen. 1:31;

2   Gen. 1:26-27; Col. 3:10; Eph. 4:24

3   Eph. 1:6; 1 Cor. 6:20;

4   Gen. 3:6; Rom. 5:12, 18-19;


2
                                                                                                               3
5   Psa. 51:5; Gen. 5:3;

6   Gen. 6:5; Job 14:4; Job 15:14, 16;

7   John 3:5; Eph. 2:5;

LORD'S DAY 4

Question 9. Doth not God then do injustice to man, by requiring from him in His law, that which he cannot
perform?

Answer: Not at all; 1for God made man capable of performing it; but man, by the instigation of the devil,2 and
his own wilful disobedience, 3deprived himself and all his posterity of those divine gifts.

Question 10. Will God suffer such disobedience and rebellion to go unpunished?

Answer: By no means; but is terribly displeased 4with our original as well as actual sins; and will punish them
in His just judgment temporally and eternally,5 as He hath declared, "Cursed is every one that continueth not
in all things, which are written in the book of the law, to do them."6

Question 11. Is not God then also merciful?

Answer: God is indeed merciful, 7but also just; 8therefore His justice requires, that sin which is committed
against the most high majesty of God, be also punished with extreme, that is, with everlasting punishment of
body and soul.

1   Eph. 4:24; Eccl. 7:29;

2   John 8:44; 2 Cor. 11:3; Gen. 3:4;

3   Gen. 3:6; Rom. 5:12; Gen. 3:13; 1 Tim. 2:13-14,

4   Gen. 2:17; Rom. 5:12,

5   Psa. 5:5; Psa. 50:21; Nah. 1:2; Exo. 20:5; Exo. 34:7; Rom. 1:18; Eph. 5:6; Deut. 28:15; Heb. 9:27;

6   Deut. 27:26; Gal. 3:10;

7   Ex. 34:6-7 ; Exo. 20:6;

8   Psa. 7:9; Ex. 20:5; Exo. 23:7; Exo. 34:7; Job 34:10-11; Psa. 5:5-6; Nah. 1:2-3; Gen. 2:17; Rom. 6:23,

THE SECOND PART - OF MAN'S DELIVERANCE

LORD'S DAY 5

Question 12. Since then, by the righteous judgment of God, we deserve temporal and eternal punishment, is
there no way by which we may escape that punishment, and be again received into favor?

Answer: God will have His justice 1satisfied: and therefore we must make this full 2satisfaction, either by
ourselves, or by another.

Question 13. Can we ourselves then make this satisfaction?



                                                                                                               3
4

Answer: By no means; 3but on the contrary we 4daily increase our debt.

Question 14. Can there be found anywhere, one, who is a mere creature, able to satisfy for us?

Answer: None; for, first, God will not 5punish any other creature for the sin which man hath committed; and
further, no mere creature can sustain the burden of God's eternal wrath against sin, so as to 6deliver others
from it.

Question 15. What sort of a mediator and deliverer then must we seek for?

Answer: For one who is very man, 7and perfectly righteous; and yet more powerful than all creatures; that is,
one who is also very 8God.

1   Ex. 20:5;

2   Deut. 24:16; 2 Cor. 5:14-15

3   Job 9:2-3; ; Job 15:14-16;

4   Matt. 6:12; Isa. 64:6;

5   Ezek. 18:20;

6   Rev. 5:3; Psa. 49:8-9

7   1 Cor. 15:21; Rom. 8:3;

8   Rom. 9:5; Isa. 7:14;

LORD'S DAY 6

Question 16. Why must he be very man, and also perfectly righteous?

Answer: Because the justice of God requires that the same human nature which hath sinned, should 1likewise
make satisfaction for sin; and one, who is himself a sinner, 2cannot satisfy for others.

Question 17. Why must he in one person be also very God?

Answer: That he might, by the power of his Godhead sustain in his human nature, the burden of God's wrath;3
and might obtain for, and restore to us, righteousness and life.4

Question 18. Who then is that Mediator, who is in one person both very God, and a real righteous man?

Answer: Our Lord Jesus Christ, 5"who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification,
and redemption."6

Question 19. Whence knowest thou this?

Answer: From the holy gospel, which God Himself first revealed in Paradise;7 and afterwards published by
the patriarchs and prophets,8 and represented by the sacrifices and other ceremonies of the law;9 and lastly,
has fulfilled it by His only begotten Son.10

1   Rom. 5:12, 15;



4
                                                                                                                    5
2   1 Pet. 3:18; Isa. 53:11;

3   1 Pet. 3:18 Acts 2:24; Isa. 53:8;

4   1 John 1:2; Jer. 23:6; 2 Tim. 1:10 John 6:51;

5   Matt. 1:23; 1 Tim. 3:16 Luke 2:11;

6   1 Cor. 1:30

7   Gen. 3:15;

8   Gen. 22:17-18; Gen. 28:14; Rom. 1:2; Heb. 1:1; John 5:46;

9   Heb. 10:7-8;

10   Rom. 10:4; Heb. 13:8;

LORD'S DAY 7

Question 20. Are all men then, as they perished in Adam, saved by Christ?

Answer: No; only1those who are ingrafted into Him, 2and receive all His benefits, by a true faith.

Question 21. What is true faith?

Answer: True faith is not only a certain knowledge, 3whereby I hold for truth all that God has revealed to us
in His word, but also an assured 4confidence, which the Holy 5Ghost works by the gospel 6in my heart; that
not only to others, but to me also, 7remission of sin, everlasting righteousness 8and salvation, are freely given
by God, 9merely of grace, only for the sake of Christ's merits.

Question 22. What is then necessary for a Christian to believe?

Answer: All things 10promised us in the gospel, which the articles of our catholic undoubted Christian faith
briefly teach us.

Question 23. What are these articles?

Answer:

I. I believe in God the Father, Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth:

II. And in Jesus Christ, His only begotten Son, our Lord:

III. Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary:

IV. Suffered under Pontius Pilate; was crucified, dead, and buried: He descended into hell:

V. The third day He arose again from the dead:

VI. He ascended into heaven, and sitteth at the right hand of God the Father Almighty:

VII. From thence He shall come to judge the quick and the dead:



                                                                                                                    5
6

VIII. I believe in the Holy Ghost:

IX. I believe an holy catholic church: the communion of saints:

X. The forgiveness of sins:

XI. The resurrection of the body:

XII. And the life everlasting. AMEN.

1   Matt. 1:21; Isa. 53:11;

2   John 1:12-13; ; Rom. 11:20; Heb. 10:39;

3   John 6:69; John 17:3; Heb. 11:3, 6;

4   Eph. 3:12;

5   Rom. 4:16, 20-21; Heb. 11:1 Eph. 3:12; Rom. 1:16; 1 Cor. 1:21; Acts 16:14 Matt. 16:17 John 3:5;

6   Rom. 10:14, 17 Matt. 9:2;

7   Rom. 5:1;

8   Gal. 2:20;

9   Rom. 3:24-26

10   John 20:31; Mat. 28:19-20;

LORD'S DAY 8

Question 24. How are these articles divided?

Answer: Into three parts; the first is of God the Father, and our creation; 1the second of God the Son, and our
redemption; 2the third of God the Holy Ghost, and our sanctification.3

Question 25. Since there is but one only 4divine essence, why speakest thou of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost?

Answer: Because God hath so 5revealed Himself in His word, that these three distinct persons are the one only
true and eternal God.

1   Gen. 1.

2   1 Pet. 1:18-19;

3   1 Pet. 1:21-22;

4   Deut. 6:4;

5   Gen. 1:26 Isa. 61:1; John 14:16-17; 1 John 5:7; John 1:13, .; Matt. 28:19, .; 2 Cor. 13:14;

OF GOD THE FATHER



6
                                                                                                                  7

LORD'S DAY 9

Question 26. What believest thou when thou sayest, "I believe in God the Father, Almighty, Maker of heaven
and earth?"

Answer: That the eternal Father of our Lord Jesus Christ (who of nothing made heaven and earth, with all that
is in them;1 who likewise upholds and 2governs the same by His eternal counsel and providence) is for the
sake of Christ His Son, my God and my Father; on whom I rely so entirely, that I have no doubt, but He will
provide me with all things necessary 3for soul and body: and further, that He will make whatever evils He
sends upon me, in this valley of tears 4turn out to my advantage; for He is able to do it, being Almighty 5God,
and willing, being a 6faithful Father.

1   Gen. 1 and 2. Psa. 33:6;

2   Psa. 115:3; Matt. 10:29; Heb. 1:3; John 5:17;

3   John 1:12, 16; Rom. 8:15-16; Gal. 4:5-6; Eph. 1:5; 1 John 3:1;

4   Psa. 55:22; Matt. 6:26;

5   Rom. 8:28; Rom. 4:21;

6   Rom. 10:12; Matt. 6:26; Matt. 7:9-11;

LORD'S DAY 10

Question 27. What dost thou mean by the providence of God?

Answer: The almighty and everywhere present power of God;1whereby, as it were by His hand, He 2upholds
and governs heaven, earth, and all creatures; so that herbs and grass, rain 3and drought, fruitful 4and barren
years, meat and drink, 5health and sickness, 6riches and poverty, yea, and all things 7come, not by chance, but
by His fatherly hand.

Question 28. What advantage is it to us to know that God has created, and by His providence doth still uphold
all things?

Answer: That we may be patient in adversity8; thankful 9in prosperity; and that in all things, which may
hereafter befall us, we place our firm 10trust in our faithful God and Father, that nothing shall 11separate us
from His love; since all creatures are so in His hand, that without His will they 12cannot so much as move.

1   Acts 17:25-28;

2   Heb. 1:3;

3   Jer. 5:24;

4   Acts 14:17;

5   John 9:3;

6   Prov. 22:2; Job 1:21;

7   Matt. 10:29-30; Eph. 1:11



                                                                                                                  7
8
8   Rom. 5:3; Psa. 39:10;

9   Deut. 8:10; 1 Thes. 5:18;

10   Rom. 5:3-6

11   Rom. 8:38-39;

12   Job 1:12; Job 2:6; Matt. 8:31; Isa. 10:15 ; ;

OF GOD THE SON

LORD'S DAY 11

Question 29. Why is the Son of God called Jesus, that is a Savior?

Answer: Because He saveth us, and delivereth us from our 1sins; and likewise, because we ought not to seek,
neither can find 2salvation in any other.

Question 30. Do such then believe in Jesus the only Savior, who seek their salvation and welfare of saints, of
themselves, or anywhere else?

Answer: They do not; for though they boast of Him in words, yet in deeds they deny 3Jesus the only deliverer
and Savior; for one of these two things must be true, that either Jesus is not a complete Savior; or that they,
who by a true faith receive this Savior, must find all things in Him 4necessary to their salvation.

1   Matt. 1:21;

2   Acts 4:12;

3   1 Cor. 1:13, 31; Gal. 5:4;

4   Col. 2:20; Isa. 9:6-7; Col. 1:19-20;

LORD'S DAY 12

Question 31. Why is He called "Christ", that is anointed?

Answer: Because He is ordained of God the Father, and 1anointed with the Holy Ghost, to be our 2chief
Prophet and Teacher, who has fully revealed to us the secret counsel and will of God concerning our
redemption; and to be our only High Priest, 3who by the one sacrifice of His body, has redeemed us, and
makes continual 4intercession with the Father for us; and also to be our eternal King, 5who governs us by His
word and Spirit, and who defends and 6preserves us in (the enjoyment of) that salvation, He has purchased for
us.

Question 32. But why art thou called a Christian?

Answer: Because I am a member of Christ 7by faith, and thus am partaker 8of His anointing; that so I may
9confess His name, and present myself a living 10sacrifice of thankfulness to Him: and also that with a free

and good conscience I may fight against sin and 11Satan in this life: and afterwards 12reign with Him eternally,
over all creatures.

1   Heb. 1:9;



8
                                                                                                              9
2   Deut. 18:18; Acts 3:22; John 1:18; John 15:15; Matt. 11:27;

3   Psa. 110:4; Heb. 7:21; Heb. 10:14;

4   Rom. 8:34;

5   Psa. 2:6; Luke 1:33;

6   Matt. 28:18; John 10:28;

7   1 Cor. 6:15;

8   1 John 2:27; Joel 2:28;

9   Matt. 10:32;

10   Rom. 12:1;

11   Eph. 6:11-12; ; 1 Tim. 1:18-19;

12   2 Tim. 2:12;

LORD'S DAY 13

Question 33. Why is Christ called the only begotten Son of God, since we are also the children of God?

Answer: Because Christ alone is the eternal and natural Son of 1God; but we are children 2adopted of God, by
grace, for His sake.

Question 34. Wherefore callest thou Him our Lord?

Answer: Because He hath redeemed us, both soul and body, from all our sins, not with gold or silver, 3but
with His precious blood, and hath delivered us from all the power of the devil; and thus hath made us His own
property.

1   John 1:1; Heb. 1:2;

2   Rom. 8:15-17; Eph. 1:5-6;

3   1 Pet. 1:18-19; 1 Cor. 6:20;

LORD'S DAY 14

Question 35. What is the meaning of these words "He was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin
Mary?"

Answer: That God's eternal Son, who 1is, and continueth true and eternal 2God, took upon Him the very
nature of man, of the flesh and 3blood of the Virgin Mary, by the operation of the Holy Ghost; 4that He might
also be the true seed of David, 5like unto His brethren in all things, 6sin excepted.

Question 36. What profit dost thou receive by Christ's holy conception and nativity?

Answer: That He is our 7Mediator; and with His innocence and perfect holiness, covers in the sight of 8God,
my sins, wherein I was conceived and brought forth.


                                                                                                              9
10


1   John 1:1; Col. 1:15; Psa. 2:7;

2   Rom. 9:5; 1 John 5:20;

3   John 1:14; Gal. 4:4;

4   Matt. 1:18; Luke 1:35;

5   Psa. 132:2; Acts 2:30; Rom. 1:3;

6   Phil. 2:7; Heb. 4:15;

7   Heb. 2:16-17;

8   Psa. 32:1; 1 Cor. 1:30; Rom. 8:34;

LORD'S DAY 15

Question 37. What dost thou understand by the words, "He suffered?"

Answer: That He, all the time that He lived on earth, but especially at the end of His life, 1sustained in body
and soul, the wrath of God against the sins of all mankind: that so by His passion, as the only 2propitiatory
sacrifice, He might redeem our body and soul from everlasting damnation, and obtain for us the favor of God,
righteousness and eternal life.

Question 38. Why did He suffer under Pontius Pilate, as judge?

Answer: That He, being innocent, and yet condemned 3by a temporal judge, might thereby free us from the
severe judgment of God to which we were exposed4.

Question 39. Is there anything more in His being crucified, than if He had died some other death?

Answer: Yes there is; for thereby I am assured, that He took on Him the curse which lay upon me; for the
death of the cross was 5accursed of God.

1   1 Pet. 2:24; Isa. 53:12;

2   1 John 2:2; Rom. 3:25;

3   Luke 23:14; John 19:4; Psa. 69:4;

4   Gal. 3:13-14;

5   Deut. 21:23; Gal. 3:13;

LORD'S DAY 16

Question 40. Why was it necessary for Christ to humble Himself even unto death?

Answer: Because with respect to the justice and truth of God, 1satisfaction for our sins could be made no
otherwise, than by the death of the Son of God.2

Question 41. Why was He also "buried?"


10
                                                                                                               11

Answer: Thereby to prove that He was really dead.3

Question 42. Since then Christ died for us, why must we also die?

Answer: Our death is not a satisfaction for our sins, 4but only an abolishing of sin, and a passage into eternal
life.5

Question 43. What further benefit do we receive from the sacrifice and death of Christ on the cross?

Answer: That by virtue thereof, our old man is crucified, dead and buried with Him; 6that so the corrupt
inclinations of the flesh may no more reign in us; 7but that we may offer ourselves unto Him a sacrifice of
thanksgiving.8

Question 44. Why is there added, "He descended into hell?"

Answer: That in my greatest temptations, I may be assured, and wholly comfort myself in this, that my Lord
Jesus Christ, by His inexpressible anguish, pains, terrors, and hellish agonies, in which He was plunged during
all His sufferings, 9but especially on the cross, hath delivered me from the anguish and torments of hell.10

1   Gen.2:17;

2   Heb. 2:9-10; Phil. 2:8; Rom. 8:3-4; Heb. 2:14-15,

3   Acts 13:29; Mark 15:43, 46; Mat. 27:59-60; Luk. 23:52-53; Joh. 19:38-42,

4   Mar. 8:37; Psa. 49:7,

5   John 5:24; Phil. 1:23; Rom. 7:24,

6   Rom. 6:6-7;

7   Rom. 6:6-8; 6:11-12; Col. 2:12,

8   Rom. 12:1;

9   Psa. 18:5-6; Psa. 116:3; Mat. 26:38; Mat. 27: 46; Heb. 5:7; Isa. 53:10;

10   Isa. 53:5,

LORD'S DAY 17

Question 45. What doth the resurrection of Christ profit us?

Answer: First, by His resurrection He has overcome death, that He might 1make us partakers of that
righteousness which He had purchased for us by His death; secondly, we are also by His power 2raised up to a
new life; and lastly, the resurrection of Christ is a 3sure pledge of our blessed resurrection.

1   1 Cor. 15:16;

2   Rom. 6:4; Col. 3:1, c

3   1 Cor. 15 Rom. 8:11;

LORD'S DAY 18


                                                                                                               11
12

Question 46. How dost thou understand these words, "He ascended into heaven?"

Answer: That Christ, in sight of His disciples, was 1taken up from earth into heaven; and that He continues
2there for our interest, until He comes again to judge the quick and the dead.


Question 47. Is not Christ then with us even to the end of the world, as He hath promised?

Answer: Christ is very man and very God; with respect to His 3human nature, He is no more on earth; but
with respect to His Godhead, majesty, grace and spirit, He is at no time absent from us.

Question 48. But if His human nature is not present, wherever His Godhead is, are not then these two natures
in Christ separated from one another?

Answer: Not at all, for since the Godhead is illimitable and 4omnipresent, it must necessarily follow that 5the
same is beyond the limits of the human nature He assumed, and yet is nevertheless in this human nature, and
remains personally united to it.

Question 49. Of what advantage to us is Christ's ascension into heaven?

Answer: First, that He is our 6advocate in the presence of His Father in heaven; secondly, that we have our
flesh in heaven as a sure pledge that He, as the head, will also 7take up to Himself, us, His members; thirdly,
that He 8sends us His Spirit as an earnest, by whose power we "seek the things which are above, where Christ
sitteth on the right hand of God, and not things on earth."9

1   Acts 1:9; Mark 16:19;

2   Heb. 4:14; Rom. 8:34; Eph. 4:10;

3   Acts 3:21; John 3:13; John 16:28; Matt. 28:20;

4   Acts 7:49; Matt. 24:30;

5   Matt. 28:20; John 16:28; John 17:11; John 3:13;

6   Heb. 9:24; 1 John 2:2; Rom. 8:34;

7   John 14:2; Eph. 2:6;

8   John 14:16; 2 Cor. 1:22; 2 Cor. 5:5;

9   Col. 3:1; Phil. 3:20;

LORD'S DAY 19

Question 50. Why is it added, "and sitteth at the right hand of God?"

Answer: Because Christ is ascended into heaven for this end, that He might 1appear as head of His church, by
whom the Father 2governs all things.

Question 51. What profit is this glory of Christ, our head, unto us?

Answer: First, that by His Holy Spirit He 3pours out heavenly graces upon us His members; and then that by
His power He defends 4and preserves us against all enemies.



12
                                                                                                             13

Question 52. What comfort is it to thee that "Christ shall come again to judge the quick and the dead?"

Answer: That in all my sorrows and persecutions, with uplifted head 5I look for the very same person, who
before offered Himself for my sake, to the tribunal of God, and has removed all curse from me, to come as
judge from heaven: who shall cast all His 6and my enemies into everlasting condemnation, but shall translate
7me with all His chosen ones to Himself, into heavenly joys and glory.


1   Eph. 1:20-22; Col. 1:18;

2   Matt. 28:18; John 5:22;

3   Eph. 4:8;

4   Psa. 2:9; John 10:28;

5   Luke 21:28; Rom. 8:23-24; 1 Thes. 4:16;

6   2 Thes. 1:6-9; Matt. 25:41;

7   Matt. 25:34;

OF GOD THE HOLY GHOST

LORD'S DAY 20

Question 53. What dost thou believe concerning the Holy Ghost?

Answer: First, that He is true and co-eternal God with the Father and the1Son; secondly, that He is also given
2me, to 3make me by a true faith, partaker of Christ and all His benefits, that He may 4comfort me and 5abide

with me for ever.

1   Gen. 1:2; Isa. 48:16; 1 Cor. 3:16;

2   Matt. 28:19; 2 Cor. 1:22;

3   Gal. 3:14; 1 Pet. 1:2;

4   Acts 9:31;

5   John 14:16 ; 1 Pet. 4:14;

LORD'S DAY 21

Question 54. What believest thou concerning the holy catholic church of Christ?

Answer: That the Son of God 1from the 2beginning to the end of the world, gathers, 3defends, and 4preserves
to Himself by His 5Spirit and Word, out of the 6whole human race, a 7church chosen to everlasting life,
agreeing in true faith; and that I am and for ever shall remain, a 8living member thereof.

Question 55. What do you understand by "the communion of saints?"

Answer: First, that all and every one, who believes, being members of Christ, are in common, 9partakers of
Him, and of all His riches and gifts; secondly, that every one must know it to be his duty, readily and
10cheerfully to employ his gifts, for the advantage and salvation of other members.



                                                                                                             13
14

Question 56. What believest thou concerning the forgiveness of sins?

Answer: That God, for the sake of 11Christ's satisfaction, will no more 12remember my sins, neither my
corrupt nature, against which I have to struggle all my life long; but will graciously impute to me the
righteousness of Christ, that I may never be 13condemned before the tribunal of God.

1   John 10:11;

2   Gen. 26:4;

3   Rom. 9:24; Eph. 1:10;

4   John 10:16;

5   Isa. 59:21;

6   Deut. 10:14-15;

7   Acts 13:48;

8   1 Cor. 1:8-9; Rom. 8:35;

9   John 1:3-4; Rom. 8:32; 1 Cor. 12:13;

10   1 Cor. 13:5; Phil. 2:4-6;

11   1 John 2:2; 2 Cor. 5:19, 21; ;

12   Jer. 31:34; Psa. 103:3-4, 10-11; Rom. 8:1-3;

13   John 3:18;

LORD'S DAY 22

Question 57. What comfort doth the "resurrection of the body afford thee?"

Answer: That not only my soul after this life shall be immediately taken 1up to Christ its head; but also, that
this my body, being raised by the power of Christ, shall be reunited with my soul, and 2made like unto the
glorious body of Christ.

Question 58. What comfort takest thou from the article of life everlasting?

Answer: That 3since I now feel in my heart the beginning of eternal joy, after this life, 4I shall inherit perfect
salvation, which 5"eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man" to conceive,
and that, to praise God therein for ever.

1   Luke 23:43; Phil. 1:23;

2   1 Cor. 15:53; Job 19:25-26;

3   2 Cor. 5:2-3, 6; Rom. 14:17;

4   Psa. 10:11;



14
                                                                                                            15
5   1 Cor. 2:9;

LORD'S DAY 23

Question 59. But what doth it profit thee now that thou believest all this?

Answer: That I am righteous in Christ, before God, and an heir of eternal life.1

Question 60. How art thou righteous before God?

Answer: Only 2by a true faith in Jesus Christ; so that, though my conscience accuse me, that I have grossly
transgressed all the commandments of God, and 3kept none of them, and am still 4inclined to all evil;
notwithstanding, God, without any 5merit of mine, but only of mere 6grace, grants7 and 8imputes to me, the
perfect 9satisfaction, righteousness and holiness of Christ; even so, as if I never had had, nor committed any
sin: yea, as if I had fully 10accomplished all that obedience which Christ has accomplished for me; 11inasmuch
as I embrace such benefit with a believing heart.

Question 61. Why sayest thou, that thou art righteous by faith only?

Answer: Not that I am acceptable to God, on account of the 12worthiness of my faith; but because only the
satisfaction, righteousness, and holiness of Christ, is my righteousness before 13God; and that I cannot
receive14 and apply the same to myself any other way than by faith only.

1   Rom. 5:1; Rom. 1:17; John 3:36;

2   Rom. 3:22, c Gal. 2:16; Eph. 2:8-9;

3   Rom. 3:9, &c.;

4   Rom. 7:23;

5   Rom. 3:24;

6   Tit. 3:5; Eph. 2:8-9;

7   Rom. 4:4-5; 2 Cor. 5:19; ;

8   1 John 2:1;

9   Rom. 3:24-25;

10   2 Cor. 5:21;

11   Rom. 3:28; John 3:18;

12   Psa. 16:2; Eph. 2:8-9;

13   1 Cor. 1:30; 1 Cor. 2:2;

14   1 John 5:10;

LORD'S DAY 24

Question 62. But why cannot our good works be the whole, or part of our righteousness before God?


                                                                                                            15
16

Answer: Because, that the righteousness, which can be approved of before the tribunal of God, must be
absolutely perfect, and in all respects 1conformable to the divine law; and also, that our best works in this life
are all imperfect and 2defiled with sin.

Question 63. What! do not our good works merit, which yet God will reward in this and in a future life?

Answer: This reward is not of merit, but of grace.3

Question 64. But doth not this doctrine make men careless and profane?

Answer: By no means: for it is impossible that those, who are implanted into Christ by a true faith, should not
bring forth fruits of 4thankfulness.

1   Gal. 3:10; Deut. 27:26;

2   Isa. 64:6

3   Luke 17:10;

4   Matt. 7:17-18; John 15:5;

OF THE SACRAMENTS

LORD'S DAY 25

Question 65. Since then we are made partakers of Christ and all His benefits by faith only, whence doth this
faith proceed?

Answer: From the Holy Ghost, who works 1faith in our hearts by the preaching of the gospel, and 2confirms it
by the use of the sacraments.

Question 66. What are the sacraments?

Answer: The sacraments are holy visible signs and seals, appointed of God for this end, that by the use
thereof, He may the more fully declare and seal to us the promise of the gospel, viz., that He grants us freely
the remission of sin, and 3life eternal, for the sake of that one sacrifice of Christ, accomplished on the cross.

Question 67. Are both word and sacraments, then, ordained and appointed for this end, that they may direct
our faith to the sacrifice of Jesus Christ on the cross, as the only ground of our salvation?

Answer: Yes, indeed: for the Holy Ghost teaches us in the gospel, and assures us by the sacraments, 4that the
whole of our salvation depends upon that one sacrifice of Christ which He offered for us on the cross.

Question 68. How many sacraments has Christ instituted in the new covenant, or testament?

Answer: 5Two: namely, holy baptism, and the holy supper.

1   Eph. 2:8; Eph. 6:23; Phil. 1:29;

2   Matt. 28:19; Rom. 4:11; ;

3   Gen. 17:11; Rom. 4:11; Lev. 6:25; Acts 22:16; Acts 2:38; Matt. 26:28;

4   Rom. 6:3; Gal. 3:27;


16
                                                                                                              17
5   1 Cor. 10:2-4;

OF HOLY BAPTISM

LORD'S DAY 26

Question 69. How art thou admonished and assured by holy baptism, that the one sacrifice of Christ upon the
cross is of real advantage to thee?

Answer: Thus: That Christ appointed 1this external washing with water, adding thereto this 2promise, that I
am as certainly washed by His blood and Spirit from all the pollution of my soul, that is, from all my sins, as I
am 3washed externally with water, by which the filthiness of the body is commonly washed away.

Question 70. What is it to be washed with the blood and Spirit of Christ?

Answer: It is to receive of God the remission of sins, freely, for the sake of Christ's blood, which He 4shed for
us by His sacrifice upon the cross; and also to be renewed by the Holy Ghost, and sanctified to be members of
Christ, that so we may more and more die unto sin, and 5lead holy and unblameable lives.

Question 71. Where has Christ promised us, that He will as certainly wash us by His blood and Spirit, as we
are washed with the water of baptism?

Answer: In the institution of baptism, which is thus expressed: 6"Go ye, therefore, and teach all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost"7, "he that believeth, and is
baptized, shall be saved; but he that believeth not, shall be damned." This promise is also repeated, where the
scripture calls baptism the 8washing of regeneration, and the washing9 away of sins.

1   Matt. 28:19; Acts 2:38;

2   Mark 16:16; Matt. 3:11; Rom. 6:3;

3   Mark 1:4; Luke 3:3;

4   Heb. 12:24; 1 Pet. 1:2;

5   John 1:33; Rom. 6:4; Col. 2:11;

6   Matt. 28:19;

7   Mark 16:16;

8   Tit. 3:5;

9   Acts 22:16;

LORD'S DAY 27

Question 72. Is then the external baptism with water the washing away of sin itself?

Answer: Not at all: for the 1blood of Jesus Christ only, and the Holy Ghost cleanse us from all 2sin.

Question 73. Why then doth the Holy Ghost call baptism "the washing of regeneration," and the "washing
away of sins?"



                                                                                                              17
18

Answer: God speaks thus not without great cause, to-wit, not only thereby to teach us, that as the filth of the
body is purged away by water, so our sins are 3removed by the blood and Spirit of Jesus Christ; but especially
that by 4this divine pledge and sign He may assure us, that we are spiritually cleansed from our sins as really,
as we are externally washed with water.

Question 74. Are infants also to be baptized?

Answer: Yes: for since they, as well as the adult, are included in the 5covenant and 6church of God; and since
7redemption from sin by the blood of Christ, and the 8Holy Ghost, the author of faith, is promised to them no

less than to the adult; they must therefore by baptism, as a sign of the covenant, be also admitted into the
Christian church; and be distinguished 9from the children of unbelievers as was done in the old covenant or
testament by 10circumcision, instead of which 11baptism is instituted in the new covenant.

1   Matt. 3:11; 1 Pet. 3:21;

2   1 John 1:7; 1 Cor. 6:11;

3   Rev. 1:5; 1 Cor. 6:11;

4   Mark 16:16; Gal. 3:27;

5   Gen. 17:7; Acts 2:39;

6   1 Cor. 7:14; Joel 2:16;

7   Matt. 19:14;

8   Luke 1:14-15; Psa. 22:10; Acts 2:39;

9   Acts 10:47; 1 Cor. 12:13; 1 Cor. 7:14; ;

10   Gen. 17:14;

11   Col. 2:11-13;

OF THE HOLY SUPPER OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST

LORD'S DAY 28

Question 75. How art thou admonished and assured in the Lord's Supper, that thou art a partaker of that one
sacrifice of Christ, accomplished on the cross, and of all His benefits?

Answer: Thus: That Christ has commanded me and all believers, to eat of this broken bread, and to drink of
this cup, in remembrance of Him, 1adding these promises: first, that His body was offered and broken on the
cross for me, and His blood shed for me, as certainly as I see with my eyes, the bread of the Lord broken for
me, and the cup communicated to me; and further, that He feeds and nourishes my soul to everlasting life,
with His crucified body and shed blood, as assuredly as I receive from the hands of the minister, and taste
with my mouth the bread and cup of the Lord, as certain signs of the body and blood of Christ.

Question 76. What is it then to eat the crucified body, and drink the shed blood of Christ?

Answer: It is not only to embrace with a believing heart all the sufferings and death of Christ, and thereby to
2obtain the pardon of sin, and life eternal; but also, besides that, to become more and more 3united to His

sacred body, by the Holy Ghost, who dwells both in Christ and in us; 4so that we, though Christ is in heaven


18
                                                                                                                19
and we on earth, are notwithstanding "Flesh of His flesh, and bone of His bone";5 and that we live, 6and are
governed forever by one spirit, as members of the same body are by one soul.

Question 77. Where has Christ promised that He will as certainly feed and nourish believers with His body
and blood, as they eat of this broken bread, and drink of this cup?

Answer: In the institution of the supper, which is thus expressed: 7"The Lord Jesus, the same night in which
He was betrayed, took bread, and when He had given thanks, He brake it, and said: eat, this is My body,
which is broken for you; this do in remembrance of Me. After the same manner also He took the cup, when
He had supped, saying: 8this cup is the new testament in My blood; 9this do ye, as often as ye drink it, in
remembrance of Me. For, as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's death till He
come."

This promise is repeated by the holy apostle Paul, where he says: 10"The cup of blessing which we bless, is it
not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? For we, being many, are one bread and one body; because we are all partakers of that one bread."

1   Matt. 26:26-28; Mark 14:22-24 Luke 22:19-20; 1 Cor. 10:16-17; 1 Cor. 11:23-25;

2   John 6:35, 40, 47-48, 50-51, 53-54;

3   John 6:55-56;

4   Acts 3:21; Acts 1:9-11; 1 Cor. 11:26;

5   Eph. 5:29-32; 1 Cor. 6:15, 17, 19; 1 John 3:24;

6   John 6:56-58; Eph. 4:15-16;

7   1 Cor. 11:23; Matt. 26:26; Mark 14:22; Luke 22:19;

8   Ex. 24:8; Heb. 9:20;

9   Ex. 13:9; 1 Cor. 11:26;

10   1 Cor. 10:16-17;

LORD'S DAY 29

Question 78. Do then the bread and wine become the very body and blood of Christ?

Answer: Not at all: 1but as the water in baptism is not changed into the blood of Christ, neither is the washing
away of sin itself, being only the sign and confirmation thereof appointed of God; so the bread in the Lord's
supper is not changed into the very 2body of Christ; though agreeably to the 3nature and properties of
sacraments, it is called the body of Christ Jesus.

Question 79. Why then doth Christ call the bread His body, and the cup His blood, or the new covenant in His
blood; and Paul the "communion of the body and blood of Christ?"

Answer: Christ speaks thus, not without great reason, namely, not only thereby to teach us, that as bread and
wine support this temporal life, so His crucified body and shed blood are the true meat and drink, whereby our
souls are 4fed to eternal life; but more especially by these visible signs and pledges to assure us, that we are as
really partakers of His true body and blood (by the operation of the Holy Ghost) as we 5receive by the mouths
of our bodies these holy signs in remembrance of Him; and that all His sufferings6 and obedience are as


                                                                                                                19
20

certainly ours, as if we had in our own persons suffered and made satisfaction for our sins to God.

1   1 Cor. 10:1-4; 1 Pet. 3:21; John 6:35, 62-63;

2   1 Cor. 10:16, c 1 Cor. 11:20, c

3   Gen. 17:10-11, 14; Ex. 12:26-27, 43, 48; Acts 7:8; Matt. 26:26; Mark 14:24;

4   John 6:51, 55-56; ;

5   1 Cor. 10:16-17; 1 Cor. 11:26-28; Eph. 5:30;

6   Rom. 5:9, 18-19; Rom. 8:4;

LORD'S DAY 30

Question 80. What difference is there between the Lord's supper and the popish mass?

Answer: The Lord's supper testifies to us, that we have a full pardon of all sin 1by the only sacrifice of Jesus
Christ, which He Himself has once accomplished on the cross; and, that we by the Holy Ghost are ingrafted
2into Christ, who, according to His human nature is now not on earth, but in 3heaven, at the right hand of God

His Father, and will there 4be worshipped by us: but the mass teaches, that the living and dead have not the
pardon of sins through the sufferings of Christ, unless Christ is also daily offered for them by the priests; and
further, that Christ is bodily under the form of bread and wine, and therefore is to be worshipped in them; so
that the mass, at bottom, is nothing else than a 5denial of the one sacrifice and sufferings of Jesus Christ, and
an accursed idolatry.

Question 81. For whom is the Lord's supper instituted?

Answer: For those who are truly sorrowful 6for their sins, and yet trust that these are forgiven them for the
sake of Christ; and that their remaining infirmities 7are covered by His passion and death; and who also
earnestly 8desire to have their faith more and more strengthened, and their lives more holy; but hypocrites, and
such as turn not to God with sincere hearts, eat and 9drink judgment to themselves.

Question 82. Are they also to be admitted to this supper, who, by confession and life, declare themselves
unbelieving and ungodly?

Answer: No; for by this, the covenant of God would be profaned, and His wrath 10kindled against the whole
congregation; therefore it is the duty of the Christian church, according to the appointment of 11Christ and His
apostles, to exclude such persons, by the keys of the kingdom of heaven, till they show amendment of life.

1   Heb. 7:27; Heb. 9:12, 26; Matt. 26:28; Luke 22:19-20; 2 Cor. 5:21;

2   1 Cor. 12:13;

3   Heb. 1:3; Heb. 8:1, c

4   John 4:21-23; Col. 3:1; ; Phil. 3:20; Luke 24:52-53; Acts 7:55;

5   Isa. 1:11, 14; Matt. 15:9; Col. 2:22-23; Jer. 2:13;

6   Matt. 5:3, 6; Luke 7:37-38; Luke 15:18-19

7   Psa. 103:3;


20
                                                                                                              21
8   Psa. 116:12-14; 1 Pet. 2:11-12;

9   1 Cor. 10:20, c 1 Cor. 11:28, c Tit. 1:16; Psa. 50:15-16;

10   1 Cor. 10:21; 1 Cor. 11:30-31; Isa. 1:11, 13; Jer. 7:21; Psa. 50:16, 22;

11   Matt. 18:17-18;

LORD'S DAY 31

Question 83. What are 1the keys of the kingdom of heaven?

Answer: The preaching2 of the holy gospel, and Christian discipline, 3or excommunication out of the
Christian church; by these two, the kingdom of heaven is opened to believers, and shut against unbelievers.

Question 84. How is the kingdom of heaven opened and shut by the preaching of the holy gospel?

Answer: Thus: when according to the command of 4Christ, it is declared and publicly testified to all and every
believer, that, whenever they 5receive the promise of the gospel by a true faith, all their sins are really
forgiven them of God, for the sake of Christ's merits; and on the contrary, when it is declared and testified to
all unbelievers, and such as do not sincerely repent, that they stand exposed to the wrath of God, and eternal
6condemnation, so long as they are 7unconverted: according to which testimony of the gospel, God will judge

them, both in this, and in the life to come.

Question 85. How is the kingdom of heaven shut and opened by Christian discipline?

Answer: Thus: when according 8to the command of Christ, those, who under the name of Christians, maintain
doctrines, or practices 9inconsistent therewith, and will not, after having been often brotherly admonished,
renounce their errors and wicked course of life, are complained of to the church, 10or to those, who are
thereunto 11appointed by the church; and if they despise their admonition, 12are by them forbidden the use of
the sacraments; whereby they are excluded from the Christian church, and by God Himself from the kingdom
of Christ; and when they promise and show real amendment, are again 13received as members of Christ and
His church.

1   Matt. 16:19 ;

2   John 20, 23

3   Matt. 18:15-18 ;

4   Matt. 28:19 ;

5   John 3:18, 36 Mark 16:16 ;

6   2 Thes. 1:7-9;

7   John 20:21-23; Matt. 16:19; Rom. 2:2, 13-17;

8   Matt. 18:15;

9   1 Cor. 5:12;

10   Matt. 18:15-18;



                                                                                                              21
22
11   Rom. 12:7-9; 1 Cor. 12:28; 1 Tim. 5:17 2 Thes. 3:14

12   Matt. 18:17; 1 Cor. 5:3-5;

13   2 Cor. 2:6-8, 10-11; Luke 15:18;

THE THIRD PART - OF THANKFULNESS

LORD'S DAY 32

Question 86. Since then we are delivered from our misery, merely of grace, through Christ, without any merit
of ours, why must we still do good works?

Answer: Because Christ, having redeemed and delivered us by His blood, also renews us by His Holy Spirit,
after His own image; that so we may testify, by the whole of our conduct, our gratitude to God for His
blessings,1 and that He may be praised by us;2 also, that every one may be assured in himself of his faith, by
the fruits thereof;3 and that, by our godly conversation, others may be gained to Christ.4

Question 87. Cannot they then be saved, who, continuing in their wicked and ungrateful lives, are not
converted to God?

Answer: By no means; for the holy scripture declares that no unchaste person, idolater, adulterer, thief,
covetous man, drunkard, slanderer, robber, or any such like, shall inherit the kingdom of God.5

1   1 Cor. 6:19-20; Rom. 6:13; Rom. 12:1-2; 1 Pet. 2:5, 9-10;

2   Matt. 5:16; 1 Pet. 2:12;

3   2 Pet. 1:10; Gal. 5:6, 24;

4   1 Pet. 3:1-2; Matt. 5:16; Rom. 14:19;

5   1 Cor. 6:9-10; Eph. 5:5-6; 1 John 3:14-15; Gal. 5:21;

LORD'S DAY 33

Question 88. Of how many parts doth the true conversion of man consist?

Answer: Of two parts; of the mortification of the old, and the quickening of the new man.1

Question 89. What is the mortification of the old man?

Answer: It is a sincere sorrow of heart, that we have provoked God by our sins; and more and more to hate
and flee from them.2

Question 90. What is the quickening of the new man?

Answer: It is a sincere joy of heart in God, through Christ,3 and with love and delight to live according to the
will of God in all good works.4

Question 91. But what are good works?

Answer: Only those which proceed from a true faith,5 are performed according to the law of God,6 and to His
glory;7 and not such as are founded on our imaginations, or the institutions of men.8


22
                                                                                                                23


1   Rom. 6:4-6 Eph. 4:22-23; Col. 3:5; 1 Cor. 5:7;

2   Psa. 51:3, 8, 17 Luke 15:18; Rom. 8:13; Joel 1:12-13;

3   Rom. 5:1-2; Rom. 14:17; Isa. 57:15;

4   Rom. 6:10-11; 1 Pet. 4:2; Gal. 2:20;

5   Rom. 14:23;

6   1 Sam. 15:22; Eph. 2:2, 10

7   1 Cor. 10:31;

8   Deut. 12:32; Ezek. 20:18; Matt. 15:9;

LORD'S DAY 34

Question 92. What is the law of God?

Answer: God spake all these words, Exodus 20:1-17, Deuteronomy 5:6-21, saying: I am the LORD thy God,
which hath brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

I. Thou shalt have no other gods before Me.

II. Thou shalt not make unto thyself any graven image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above,
or in the earth beneath, or in the water under the earth. Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve
them; for I, the Lord thy God, am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, unto the
third and fourth generation of them that hate Me, and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love Me,
and keep My commandments.

III. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless, that
taketh His Name in vain.

IV. Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy; six days shalt thou labor and do all thy work; but the seventh
day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God; in it thou shalt do no manner of work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy
daughter, thy man servant, nor thy maid servant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates. For in
six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day:
wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed it.

V. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.

VI. Thou shalt not kill.

VII. Thou shalt not commit adultery.

VIII. Thou shalt not steal.

IX. Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

X. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's house; thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife, nor his man servant,
nor his maid servant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbor's.



                                                                                                                23
24

Question 93. How are these commandments divided?

Answer: Into two tables;1 the first of which teaches us how we must behave towards God; the second, what
duties we owe to our neighbor.2

Question 94. What doth God enjoin in the first commandment?

Answer: That I, as sincerely as I desire the salvation of my own soul, avoid and flee from all idolatry,3
sorcery, soothsaying, superstition,4 invocation of saints, or any other creatures;5 and learn rightly to know the
only true God;6 trust in Him alone;7 with humility and patience8 submit to Him;9 expect all good things from
Him only;10 love,11 fear,12 and glorify13 Him with my whole heart; so that I renounce and forsake all
creatures,14 rather than commit even the least thing contrary to His will.15

Question 95. What is idolatry?

Answer: Idolatry is, instead of, or besides that one true God, who has manifested Himself in His word, to
contrive, or have any other object, in which men place their trust.16

1   Ex. 34:28-29

2   Deut. 4:13; Deut. 10:3-4;

3   1 Cor. 6:9-10 1 Cor. 10:7, 14

4   Lev. 18:21; Deut. 18:10-12;

5   Matt. 4:10 Rev. 19:10

6   John 17:3;

7   Jer. 17:5, 7;

8   Heb. 10:36; Col. 1:11; Rom. 5:3-4; Phil. 2:14;

9   1 Pet. 5:5-6;

10   Psa. 104:27; Isa. 45:7; James 1:17;

11   Deut. 6:5; Matt. 22:37;

12   Deut. 6:5; Matt. 10:28;

13   Matt. 4:10;

14   Matt. 5:29-30; Acts 5:29; Matt. 10:37;

15   Matt. 5:19;

16   2 Chron. 16:12; Phil. 3:18-19; Gal. 4:8; Eph. 2:12;

LORD'S DAY 35

Question 96. What doth God require in the second commandment?



24
                                                                                                             25

Answer: That we in no wise represent God by images,1 nor worship Him in any other way than He has
commanded in His word.2

Question 97. Are images then not at all to be made?

Answer: God neither can, nor may be represented by any means.3 But as to creatures; though they may be
represented, yet God forbids to make, or have any resemblance of them, either in order to worship them or to
serve God by them.4

Question 98. But may not images be tolerated in the churches, as books to the laity?

Answer: No: for we must not pretend to be wiser than God, who will have His people taught, not by dumb
images,5 but by the lively preaching of His Word.6

1   Deut. 4:15 Isa. 40:18; Rom. 1:23, c Acts 17:29;

2   1 Sam. 15:23; Deut. 12:30;

3   Deut. 4:15-16; Isa. 46:5; Rom. 1:23;

4   Ex. 23:24; Ex. 34:13-14; Numb. 33:52; Deut. 7:5;

5   2 Tim. 3:16 ; 2 Pet. 1:19;

6   Jer. 10:1, c Hab. 2:18-19;

LORD'S DAY 36

Question 99. What is required in the third commandment?

Answer: That we, not only by cursing1 or perjury, but also by rash swearing,2 must not profane or abuse the
name of God; nor by silence or connivance be partakers of these horrible sins in others; and, briefly, that we
use the holy name of God3 no otherwise than with fear and reverence; so that He may be rightly confessed4
and worshipped by us,5 and be glorified in all our words and works.

Question 100. Is then the profaning of God's name, by swearing and cursing, so heinous a sin, that His wrath
is kindled against those who do not endeavor, as much as in them lies, to prevent and forbid such cursing and
swearing?

Answer: It undoubtedly is, for there is no sin greater or more provoking to God, than the profaning of His
Name;6 and therefore He has commanded this sin to be punished with death.7

1   Lev. 24:11; Lev. 19:12; Matt. 5:37; Lev. 5:4;

2   Isa. 45:23-24;

3   Matt. 10:32;

4   1 Tim. 2:8;

5   1 Cor. 3:16-17;

6   Lev. 5:1;



                                                                                                             25
26
7   Lev. 24:15;

LORD'S DAY 37

Question 101. May we then swear religiously by the name of God?

Answer: Yes: either when the magistrates demand it of the subjects; or when necessity requires us thereby to
confirm fidelity and truth to the glory of God, and the safety of our neighbor;1 for such an oath is founded on
God's Word,2 and therefore was justly used by the saints, both in the Old and New Testament.3

Question 102. May we also swear by saints or any other creatures?

Answer: No; for a lawful oath is calling upon God, as the only one who knows the heart, that He will bear
witness to the truth, and punish me if I swear falsely;4 which honor is due to no creature.5

1   Ex. 22:11; Neh. 13:25;

2   Deut. 6:13; Heb. 6:16;

3   Gen. 21:24; Jos. 9:15, 19; 1 Sam. 24:22 ; 2 Cor. 1:23; Rom. 1:9 ;

4   2 Cor. 1:23;

5   Matt. 5:34-35;

LORD'S DAY 38

Question 103. What doth God require in the fourth commandment?

Answer: First, that the ministry of the gospel and the schools be maintained;1 and that I, especially on the
Sabbath, that is, on the day of rest,2 diligently frequent the church of God,3 to hear His word, to use the
sacraments,4 publicly to call upon the Lord,5 and contribute to the relief of the poor,6 as becomes a Christian.
Secondly, that all the days of my life I cease from my evil works, and yield myself to the Lord, to work by His
Holy Spirit in me: and thus begin in this life the eternal Sabbath.7

1   Deut. 12:19; Tit. 1:5; 1 Tim. 3:14-15; 1 Cor. 9:11; 2 Tim. 2:2; 1 Tim. 3:15;

2   Lev. 23:3 ;

3   Acts 2:42, 46; 1 Cor. 14:19, 29, 31;

4   1 Cor. 11:33

5   1 Tim. 2:1

6   1 Cor. 16:2

7   Isa. 66:23

LORD'S DAY 39

Question 104. What doth God require in the fifth commandment?




26
                                                                                                              27

Answer: That I show all honor, love and fidelity, to my father and mother, and all in authority over me, and
submit myself to their good instruction and correction, with due obedience;1 and also patiently bear with their
weaknesses and infirmities,2 since it pleases God to govern us by their hand.3

1   Eph. 6:1-2, c Col. 3:18, 20; Eph. 5:22 Rom. 1:31

2   Prov. 23:22

3   Eph. 6:5-6; Col. 3:19, 21; Rom. 13:1-8; Matt. 22:21

LORD'S DAY 40

Question 105. What doth God require in the sixth commandment?

Answer: That neither in thoughts, nor words, nor gestures, much less in deeds, I dishonor, hate, wound, or kill
my neighbor, by myself or by another;1 but that I lay aside all desire of revenge:2 also, that I hurt not myself,
nor wilfully expose myself to any danger.3 Wherefore also the magistrate is armed with the sword, to prevent
murder.4

Question 106. But this commandment seems only to speak of murder?

Answer: In forbidding murder, God teaches us, that He abhors the causes thereof, such as envy,5 hatred,6
anger, and desire of revenge; and that He accounts all these as murder.7

Question 107. But is it enough that we do not kill any man in the manner mentioned above?

Answer: No: for when God forbids envy, hatred, and anger, He commands us to love our neighbor as
ourselves;8 to show patience,9 peace, meekness,10 mercy,11 and all kindness, towards him, and prevent his hurt
as much as in us lies;12 and that we do good, even to our enemies.13

1   Matt. 5:21-22; Prov. 12:18; Matt. 26:52;

2   Eph. 4:26; Rom. 12:19; Matt. 5:39-40;

3   Matt. 4:5-7; Col. 2:23

4   Gen. 9:6; Matt. 26:52; Rom. 13:4;

5   James 1:20; Gal. 5:20;

6   Rom. 1:29; 1 John 2:9;

7   1 John 3:15;

8   Matt. 22:39; Matt. 7:12;

9   Rom. 12:10;

10   Eph. 4:2; Gal. 6:1-2; Matt. 5:5; Rom. 12:18;

11   Ex. 23:5;

12   Matt. 5:45



                                                                                                              27
28
13   Rom. 12:20;

LORD'S DAY 41

Question 108. What doth the seventh commandment teach us?

Answer: That all uncleanness is accursed of God:1 and that therefore we must with all our hearts detest the
same,2 and live chastely and temperately,3 whether in holy wedlock, or in single life.4

Question 109. Doth God forbid in this commandment, only adultery, and such like gross sins?

Answer: Since both our body and soul are temples of the Holy Ghost, He commands us to preserve them pure
and holy: therefore He forbids all unchaste actions, gestures,5 words, thoughts, desires,6 and whatever can
entice men thereto.7

1   Lev. 18:27;

2   Deut. 29:20-23;

3   1 Thes. 4:3-4;

4   Heb. 13:4; 1 Cor. 7:4-9;

5   Eph. 5:3; 1 Cor. 6:18;

6   Matt. 5:28;

7   Eph. 5:18; 1 Cor. 15:33;

LORD'S DAY 42

Question 110. What doth God forbid in the eighth commandment?

Answer: God forbids not only those thefts1 and robberies2 which are punishable by the magistrate; but He
comprehends under the name of theft all wicked tricks and devices, whereby we design to appropriate to
ourselves the goods which belong to our neighbor;3 whether it be by force, or under the appearance of right, as
by unjust weights,4 ells, measures,5 fraudulent merchandise, false coins, usury,6 or by any other way
forbidden by God; as also all covetousness,7 all abuse and waste of His gifts.

Question 111. But what doth God require in this commandment?

Answer: That I promote the advantage of my neighbor in every instance I can or may; and deal with him as I
desire to be dealt with by others;8 further also that I faithfully labor, so that I may be able to relieve the
needy.9

1   1 Cor. 6:10;

2   1 Cor. 5:10;

3   Luke 3:14; 1 Thes. 4:6;

4   Prov. 11:1;

5   Ezek. 45:9-11; Deut. 25:13


28
                                                                                                                29
6   Psa. 15:5; Luke 6:35;

7   1 Cor. 6:10

8   Matt. 7:12;

9   Prov. 5:16 Eph. 4:28

LORD'S DAY 43

Question 112. What is required in the ninth commandment?

Answer: That I bear false witness against no man1 nor falsify any man's words;2 that I be no backbiter, nor
slanderer;3 that I do not judge, nor join in condemning any man rashly, or unheard;4 but that I avoid all sorts
of lies and deceit,5 as the proper works of the devil,6 unless I would bring down upon me the heavy wrath of
God; likewise, that in judgment and all other dealings I love the truth, speak it uprightly and confess it;7 also
that I defend and promote, as much as I am able, the honor and good character of my neighbor.8

1   Prov. 19:5, 9 Prov. 21:28

2   Psa. 15:3

3   Rom. 1:29-30

4   Matt. 7:1, c Luke 6:37

5   Lev. 19:11

6   Prov. 12:22 Prov. 13:5

7   1 Cor. 13:6 Eph. 4:25

8   1 Pet. 4:8

LORD'S DAY 44

Question 113. What doth the tenth commandment require of us?

Answer: That even the smallest inclination or thought, contrary to any of God's commandments, never rise in
our hearts; but that at all times we hate all sin with our whole heart, and delight in all righteousness.1

Question 114. But can those who are converted to God perfectly keep these commandments?

Answer: No: but even the holiest men, while in this life, have only a small beginning of this obedience;2 yet
so, that with a sincere resolution they begin to live, not only according to some, but all the commandments of
God.3

Question 115. Why will God then have the ten commandments so strictly preached, since no man in this life
can keep them?

Answer: First, that all our lifetime we may learn more and more to know our sinful nature,4 and thus become
the more earnest in seeking the remission of sin, and righteousness in Christ;5 likewise, that we constantly
endeavor and pray to God for the grace of the Holy Spirit, that we may become more and more conformable
to the image of God, till we arrive at the perfection proposed to us, in a life to come.6


                                                                                                                29
30


1   Rom. 7:7, &c

2   Rom. 7:14

3   Rom. 7:22, 15, &c James 3:2

4   1 John 1:9 Rom. 3:20; Rom. 5:13 Rom. 7:7

5   Rom. 7:24;

6   1 Cor. 9:24 Phil. 3:12-14

OF PRAYER

LORD'S DAY 45

Question 116. Why is prayer necessary for Christians?

Answer: Because it is the chief part of thankfulness which God requires of us;1 and also, because God will
give His grace and Holy Spirit to those only, who with sincere desires continually ask them of Him, and are
thankful for them.2

Question 117. What are the requisites of that prayer, which is acceptable to God, and which He will hear?

Answer: First, that we from the heart pray to the one true God only, who hath manifested Himself in His
Word,3 for all things, He hath commanded us to ask of Him;4 secondly, that we rightly and thoroughly know
our need and misery, that so we may deeply humble ourselves in the presence of His divine majesty;5 thirdly,
that we be fully persuaded that He, notwithstanding that we are unworthy of it,6 will, for the sake of Christ our
Lord, certainly hear our prayer,7 as He has promised us in His word.8

Question 118. What hath God commanded us to ask of Him?

Answer: All things necessary for soul and body;9 which Christ our Lord has comprised in that prayer He
Himself has taught us.10

Question 119. What are the words of that prayer?

Answer: Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be Thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done on
earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.
And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For Thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the
glory, for ever. Amen.

1   Psa. 50:14-15

2   Matt. 7:7 Luke 11:9, 13; Matt. 13:12 Psa. 50:15

3   John 4:22-23

4   Rom. 8:26 1 John 5:14

5   John 4:23-24 Psa. 145:18

6   2 Chron. 20:12


30
                                                                                                            31
7   Psa. 2:11 Psa. 34:18-19 Isa. 66:2

8   Rom. 10:13 Rom. 8:15-16; James 1:6, &c John 14:13 Dan. 9:17-18; Matt. 7:8 Psa. 143:1

9   James 1:17 Matt. 6:33

10   Matt. 6:9-10, &c Luke 11:2, &c

LORD'S DAY 46

Question 120. Why hath Christ commanded us to address God thus: Our Father ?

Answer: That immediately, in the very beginning of our prayer, He might excite in us a childlike reverence
for, and confidence in God, which are the foundation of our prayer: namely, that God is become our Father in
Christ,1 and will much less deny us what we ask of Him in true faith, than our parents will refuse us earthly
things.2

Question 121. Why is it here added, Which art in heaven ?

Answer: Lest we should form any earthly conceptions of God's heavenly majesty,3 and that we may expect
from His almighty power all things necessary for soul and body.4

1   Mat. 6:9

2   Mat. 7:9-11; Luke 11:11; Isa. 49:15

3   Jer. 23:24

4   Acts 17:24; Rom. 10:12

LORD'S DAY 47

Question 122. Which is the first petition?

Answer: Hallowed be Thy name;1 that is, grant us, first, rightly to know Thee,2 and to sanctify, glorify and
praise Thee, in all Thy works, in which Thy power, wisdom, goodness, justice, mercy and truth, are clearly
displayed;3 and further also, that we may so order and direct our whole lives, our thoughts, words and actions,
that Thy name may never be blasphemed, but rather honored and praised on our account.4

1   Matt. 6:9

2   John 17:3 Jer. 9:23-24 Matt. 16:17 James 1:5

3   Psa. 119:137-138 Luke 1:46 Psa. 145:8-9

4   Psa. 115:1 Psa. 71:8

LORD'S DAY 48

Question 123. Which is the second petition?

Answer: Thy kingdom come;1 that is, rule us so by Thy word and Spirit, that we may submit ourselves more
and more to Thee;2 preserve and increase Thy church;3 destroy the works of the devil,4 and all violence which
would exalt itself against Thee; and also, all wicked counsels devised against Thy holy word; till the full


                                                                                                            31
32

perfection of Thy kingdom take place,5 wherein Thou shalt be all in all.6

1   Matt. 6:10

2   Psa. 119:5;

3   Psa. 51:18;

4   1 John 3:8 Rom. 16:20

5   Rev. 22:17, 20;

6   1 Cor. 15:15, 28

LORD'S DAY 49

Question 124. Which is the third petition?

Answer: Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven;1 that is, grant that we and all men may renounce our
own will,2 and without murmuring obey Thy will,3 which is only good; that so every one may attend to, and
perform the duties of his station and calling4 as willingly and faithfully as the angels do in heaven.5

1   Matt. 6:10

2   Matt. 16:24; Tit. 2:12;

3   Luke 22:42

4   1 Cor. 7:24 Eph. 4:1

5   Psa. 103:20

LORD'S DAY 50

Question 125. Which is the fourth petition?

Answer: Give us this day our daily bread;1 that is, be pleased to provide us with all things necessary for the
body,2 that we may thereby acknowledge Thee to be the only fountain of all good,3 and that neither our care
nor industry, nor even Thy gifts, can profit us without Thy blessing;4 and therefore that we may withdraw our
trust from all creatures, and place it alone in Thee.5

1   Matt. 6:11

2   Psa. 145:15 Matt. 6:25, c

3   Acts 17:25; Acts 14:17

4   1 Cor. 15:58 Deut. 8:3 Psa. 127:1-2

5   Psa. 62:11 Psa. 55:22

LORD'S DAY 51

Question 126. Which is the fifth petition?

32
                                                                                                                33

Answer: And forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors;1 that is, be pleased for the sake of Christ's blood,
not to impute to us poor sinners, our transgressions, nor that depravity, which always cleaves to us;2 even as
we feel this evidence of Thy grace in us, that it is our firm resolution from the heart to forgive our neighbor.3

1   Matt. 6:12

2   Psa. 51:1 1 John 2:1-2

3   Matt. 6:14-15

LORD'S DAY 52

Question 127. Which is the sixth petition?

Answer: And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil;1 that is, since we are so weak in ourselves,
that we cannot stand a moment;2 and besides this, since our mortal enemies, the devil,3 the world,4 and our
own flesh,5 cease not to assault us, do Thou therefore preserve and strengthen us by the power of Thy Holy
Spirit, that we may not be overcome in this spiritual warfare, but constantly and strenuously may resist our
foes6 till at last we obtain a complete victory.7

Question 128. How dost thou conclude thy prayer?

Answer: For Thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever;8 that is, all these we ask of Thee,
because Thou, being our King and almighty, art willing and able to give us all good;9 and all this we pray for,
that thereby not we, but Thy holy name, may be glorified for ever.10

Question 129. What doth the word Amen signify?

Answer: Amen signifies, it shall truly and certainly be: for my prayer is more assuredly heard of God, than I
feel in my heart that I desire these things of Him.11

1   Matt. 6:13;

2   Rom. 8:26 Psa. 103:14

3   1 Pet. 5:8

4   Eph. 6:12 John 15:19




                                                                                                                33
34




34
